Effect of diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC) and ticlopidine on CYP1A2 activity and caffeine metabolism: an in vitro comparative study with human cDNA-expressed CYP1A2 and liver microsomes.
The aim of the present study was to test the effect of diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC), which is regarded as a cytochrome P450 (CYP) CYP2A6 and CYP2E1 inhibitor, and ticlopidine, an efficient CYP2B6, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 inhibitor, on the activity of human CYP1A2 and the metabolism of caffeine (-N-,-N- and-N-demethylation, and C-- hydroxylation).
The experiment was carried out in vitro using human cDNA-expressed CYP1A2 (Supersomes) and human pooled liver microsomes.
The effects of DDC and ticlopidine were compared to those of furafylline (a strong CYP1A2 inhibitor).
A comparative in vitro study provides clear evidence that ticlopidine and DDC, applied at concentrations that inhibit the above-mentioned CYP isoforms, potently (as compared to furafylline) inhibit human CYP1A2 and caffeine metabolism, in particular-N- and-N-demethylation.
Inhibitory effects of deoxypodophyllotoxin from Anthriscus sylvestris on human CYP2C9 and CYP3A4.
Deoxypodophyllotoxin (DPT) is a bioactive compound of Anthriscus sylvestris (Apiaceae).
In the present study, the inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP) by DPT was evaluated in human liver microsomes (HLM) and the baculovirus-insect cell-expressed human CYPs using a cocktail probe assay.
The Lineweaver-Burke plots for the inhibition of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 in HLM and baculovirus-insect cell-expressed human CYPs were consistent with a competitive type of inhibition.
When a mixture of specific CYP substrates was incubated with DPT in HLM, CYP2C9-catalyzed diclofenac 4-hydroxylation and CYP3A4-catalyzed midazolam 1-hydroxylation were strongly inhibited by DPT, with IC (50) values of 6.3 and 9.2 microM, respectively.
From these results, DPT was characterized to be a competitive inhibitor of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4, with K(i) values of 3.5 and 10.8 microM in HLM and 24.9 and 3.5 microM in baculovirus-insect cell-expressed human CYPs, respectively.
Perazine at therapeutic drug concentrations inhibits human cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 1A2 (CYP1A2) and caffeine metabolism--an in vitro study.
The aim of the present study was to estimate the inhibitory effect of perazine, a phenothiazine neuroleptic with piperazine structure in a side chain, on human CYP1A2 activity measured as a rate of caffeine 3-N- and 1-N-demethylation.
Moreover, the influence of perazine on other caffeine metabolic pathways such as 7-N-demethylation (CYP1A2, CYP2C8/9, CYP3A4) and 8-hydroxylation (CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C8/9) was also determined.
The Dixon analysis showed that in both human liver microsomes and Supersomes CYP1A2 perazine potently and to a similar degree inhibited caffeine 3-N-demethylation (K(i) = 3.5 microM) and 1-N-demethylation (K(i) = 5 microM).
Hence, taking account of CYP1A2 contribution to the metabolism of endogenous substances (steroids), drugs (xanthine derivatives, phenacetin, propranolol, imipramine, phenothiazine neuroleptics, clozapine) and carcinogenic compounds, the inhibition of CYP1A2 by perazine may be of physiological, pharmacological and toxicological importance.
Perazinemoderately diminished the rate of caffeine 7-N-demethylation in Supersomes CYP1A2 (K(i) = 11.5 microM) and liver microsomes (K(i) = 20 microM), and attenuated C-8-hydroxylation (K(i) = 15.5 microM) in Supersomes CYP1A2.
On the other hand, perazine weakly inhibited caffeine C-8-hydroxylation in liver microsomes (K(i) = 98 microM).
About 80% of basal CYP1A2 activity was reduced by the therapeutic concentrations of perazine (5-10 microM).
The obtained results show that perazine at its therapeutic concentrations is a potent inhibitor of human CYP1A2.
Roles of different CYP enzymes in the formation of specific fluvastatin metabolites by human liver microsomes.
Fluvastatin has been considered to be metabolised to 5-hydroxy fluvastatin (M-2), 6-hydroxy fluvastatin (M-3) and N-desisopropyl fluvastatin (M-5) in human liver microsomes by primarily CYP2C9.
To elucidate the contribution of different CYP enzymes on fluvastatin metabolism, we examined the effect of CYP inhibitors and CYP2C-specific monoclonal antibodies on the formation of fluvastatin metabolites in human liver microsomes.
Human liver microsomes were incubated with fluvastatin with or without pre-treatment with CYP inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies.
Selective inhibitors of CYP2C9 (sulfaphenazole), CYP3A (ketoconazole) and CYP2C8 (quercetin) were employed and monoclonal antibodies were against CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2C8/9/18/19.
According to the amount of fluvastatin metabolites produced, the formation of M-3 was found to be major pathway of fluvastatin metabolism (the relative contribution was calculated to be more than 80%).
In contrast to previous published work, our results suggest that M-2 and M-5 are formed preferentially by CYP2C9, and that M-3 is mainly formed by CYP3A.
In summary, the results contribute to a better understanding of the drug-drug interaction potential for fluvastatin in vivo.
Sulfaphenazole inhibited the formation of M-2 largely, but had little effect on the formation of M-3.
It also inhibited the formation of M-5.
Ketoconazole markedly inhibited the formation of M-3, but did not inhibit the formation of M-2 and M-5.
Quercetin had a moderate inhibitory effect on the formation of all three fluvastatin metabolites.
Monoclonal antibodies against CYP2C9 and CYP2C8/9/18/19 markedly inhibited the formation of M-2 and M-5.
None of monoclonal antibodies showed clear inhibition on the formation of M-3.
The oxidative metabolism of dimemorfan by human cytochrome P450 enzymes.
To characterize the human cytochrome P450 (P450) forms involved in dimemorfanoxidation (DFO), human liver microsomes, and recombinant P450s were investigated.
Liquid chromatography-mass spectral analysis suggested that metabolite (M)1 ( [M + H](+) m/z at 272.200) and M2 ( [M + H](+) m/z at 242.190) were d-3-hydroxymethyl-N-methylmorphinan and d-3-methylmorphinan, respectively.
Kinetic analyses of microsomal DFO showed that the substrate concentration showing a half-maximal velocity (S(50)) of M1 formation was less than that of M2.
Microsomal M1 and M2 formation activities correlated significantly with the CYP2D6 marker, dextromethorphan O-demethylation activity.
The M2 formation activity was also correlated with the CYP3A4 marker, nifedipine oxidation activity.
The immunoinhibition-defined P450 contributions indicated the participation of CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6 in the M1 formation and CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 in the M2 formation.
These results indicated the participation of multiple P450 forms in DFO.
Microsomal M1 and M2 formation was most sensitive to the inhibition by a CYP2D6 inhibitor, paroxetine and a CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole, respectively.
Among recombinant P450s, CYP2D6 had the highest intrinsic clearance with a K(m) value of 0.02 mM in forming M1.
CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 had the K(m) or S(50) values smaller than those (1 mM) of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in forming M2.
R(+)XK469 inhibits hydroxylation of S-warfarin by CYP2C9.
XK469 is a novel topoisomerase II inhibitor structurally akin to several propionic acid derivatives, such as ibuprofen and diclofenac, which are metabolised by CYP2C9.
We report eight subjects who experienced significant elevation of INR while receiving concomitant R(+)XK469 and warfarin.
The aim of the study is to investigate whether R(+)XK469 interacts with S-warfarin by inhibition of CYP2C9.
The effect of R(+)XK469 on S-warfarin hydroxylation was determined by the measurement of S-7-hydroxywarfarin formation in pooled human liver microsomes and cDNA-expressed CYP2C9.
The K(i) values of R(+)XK469 were estimated to be 959+/-426 microM for human liver microsomes and to be 377+/-92 microM for CYP2C9.
At the recommended phase II dose of R(+)XK469, the ratio of C(max)/K(i) is >1.
R(+)XK469 competitively inhibited S-warfarin hydroxylation.
This suggests that coadministration of R(+)XK469 and warfarin results in a clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction due to CYP2C9 inhibition by R(+)XK469.
In vitro metabolism and inhibitory effects of pranlukast in human liver microsomes.
We investigated the metabolism of pranlukast, a selective leukotriene agonist, and the potential for drug-drug interactions.
The [I](in,max,u)/K(i) ratios were 0.004 and 0.003, respectively.
The K(i) values were about 300-fold greater than the [I](in,max,u), therefore it is suggested that, at clinical doses, pranlukast will not affect the pharmacokinetics of concomitantly administered drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP2C8 and/or 2C9 or CYP3A4.
Although cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 appeared to be the major cytochrome P450 isoform involved in the metabolism of pranlukast, the results suggested that pranlukast metabolism was inhibited less than 50% by ketoconazole, a reversible CYP3A4 inhibitor, or by anti-CYP3A4 antibodies.
Irreversible macrolide CYP3A4 inhibitors, clarithromycin, erythromycin and roxithromycin, exhibited little effect on pranlukast  metabolism.
On the other hand, pranlukast reversibly inhibited CYP2C8 and/or 2C9, and CYP3A4, with K(i) values of 3.9 and 4.1 micromol/l, respectively.
Evaluation of the inhibitory and induction potential of YM758, a novel If channel inhibitor, for human P450-mediated metabolism.
This study was designed to examine the in vitro metabolism of YM758, a novel cardiovascular agent, and to evaluate its potential to cause drug interactions and induction of CYP isozymes.
After incubation with pooled human liver microsomes, YM758 was converted to two major metabolites (AS2036313-00, and YM-394111 or YM-394112).
The formation of AS2036313-00, and YM-394111 or YM-394112 were mediated by CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, respectively, which was elucidated by using a bank of human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP enzymes in combination with the utilization of typical substrates and inhibitors.
The tested concentration was much higher than that in human plasma, which suggests that the induction potential of YM758 is also negligible.
The Ki values of YM758 for midazolam, nifedipine, and metoprololmetabolism ranged from 59 to 340 microM, being much higher than the YM758 concentration in human plasma.
The formation of AS2036313-00, and YM-394111 or YM-394112 was inhibited by quinidine and ketoconazole with Ki values of 140 and 0.24 microM, respectively, which indicates that YM758metabolismmay be affected by coadministration of strong CYP2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors in vivo, given the clinical plasma concentrations of quinidine and ketoconazole.
After human hepatocytes were exposed to 10 microMYM758, microsomal activity and mRNA level for CYP1A2 were notinduced while those for CYP3A4 were slightlyinduced.
CYP2C8- and CYP3A-mediated C-demethylation of (3-{ [(4-tert-butylbenzyl)-(pyridine-3-sulfonyl)-amino]-methyl}-phenoxy)-acetic acid (CP-533,536), an EP2 receptor-selective prostaglandin E2 agonist: characterization of metabolites by high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry-nuclear magnetic resonance.
CP-533,536, (3-{ [(4-tert-butyl-benzyl)-(pyridine-3-sulfonyl)-amino]-methyl}-phenoxy)-acetic acid (1), an EP2 receptor-selective prostaglandin E2 agonist, is being developed to aid in the healing of bone fractures.
To support the development of this program, in vitro metabolism of 1 was investigated in human liver microsomes and major recombinant human cytochrome P450 (P450) isoforms.
1 was metabolized in vitro by at least three recombinant human P450s: CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP2C8.
The major metabolic pathways were caused by oxidation of the tert-butyl moiety to form the omega-hydroxy metabolite (M4), oxidation of the pyridine moiety, and/or N-dealkylation of the methylphenoxy acetic acid moiety.
The alcohol metabolite M4 was further oxidized to the corresponding carboxylic acid M3.
In addition to these pathways, three unusual metabolites (M22, M23, and M26) resulting from C-demethylation of the tert-butyl group were identified using high-resolution liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry/NMR.
The C-demethylated metabolites were not detected on incubation of carboxylic acid metabolite M3 with either human liver microsomes or CYP3A/2C8 isoforms, suggesting that these metabolites were not derived from decarboxylation of M3.
A possible mechanism for C-demethylation may involve the oxidation of M4 to form an aldehyde metabolite (M24), followed by P450-mediated deformylation, to give an unstable carbon-centered radical and formic acid.
The carbon-centered radical intermediate then undergoes either oxygen rebound to form an alcohol metabolite M23 or hydrogen abstraction leading to an olefin metabolite M26.
The turnover of 1 was NADPH-dependent and was completely inhibited by ketoconazole and quercetin in the CYP3A4/5 and CYP2C8 incubations, respectively.
Application and interpretation of hPXR screening data: Validation of reporter signal requirements for prediction of clinically relevant CYP3A4 inducers.
A human pregnane X receptor (PXR) reporter-gene assay was established and validated using 19 therapeutic agents known to be clinical CYP3A4 inducers, 5 clinical non-inducers, and 6 known inducers in human hepatocytes.
The extent of CYP3A4induction (measured as RIF ratio in comparison to rifampicin) and EC50 was obtained from the dose-response curve.
All of the clinical inducers (19/19) and human hepatocyte inducers (6/6) showed positive responses in the PXR assay.
An additional series of 18 commonly used drugs with no reports of clinical induction was also evaluated as putative negative controls.
The induction potential index calculated based on the maximum RIF ratio, EC50, and in vivo maximum plasma concentration was used to predict the likelihood of CYP3A4induction in humans.
When the induction potential index is greater than 0.08, the compound is likely to cause induction in humans.
A high-throughput screening strategy was developed based on the validation results at 1 microM and 10 microM for the same set of drugs.
A RIF ratio of 0.4 was set as more practical screening cut-off to minimize the possibility of generating false positives.
Thus, a tiered approach was implemented to use the human PXR reporter-gene assay from early lead optimization to late lead characterization in drug discovery.
One out of five clinical non-inducers, pioglitazone, also showed a positive response.
Sixteen of these were negative (89%), whereas two of these, flutamide and haloperidol showed 16-fold (RIF ratio 0.79) and 10-fold (RIF ratio 0.48) maximal induction, respectively in the reporter-gene system.
Flutamide and haloperidol were further demonstrated to cause CYP3A4induction in human cryopreserved hepatocytes based on testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activity.
Effect of butylated hydroxytoluene, curcumin, propyl gallate and thiabendazole on cytochrome P450 forms in cultured human hepatocytes.
1.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of four food chemicals, namely butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), curcumin(CC), propyl gallate (PG) and thiabendazole (TB), on cytochrome P450 (CYP) forms in cultured human hepatocytes.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Treatment of human hepatocytes for 72 h with 2-200 microMTB produced concentration-dependent increases in CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 mRNA levels, whereas treatment with BHTincreased CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 mRNA levels.
CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 mRNA levels were induced around 48-, 21- and 9-fold, respectively, by 200 microMTB, with CYP2B6 and CYP 3A4 mRNA levels being induced around /12- and 7-fold, respectively, by 200 microMBHT.
In contrast, the treatment of human hepatocytes for 72 h with PG and CC had little or no effect on CYP mRNA levels.
The treatment of human hepatocytes with TB also induced CYP1A-dependent 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase activity, whereas BHTinducedCYP3A-dependent testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase activity.
In summary, the results demonstrate that TB is a mixed inducer of CYP forms in human hepatocytes inducing CYP1A, CYP2B and CYP3A forms, whereas BHT is an inducer of CYP2B and CYP3A forms.
A novel bioactivation pathway for 2- [2-(2,6-dichlorophenyl)aminophenyl]ethanoic acid (diclofenac) initiated by cytochrome P450-mediated oxidative decarboxylation.
Diclofenac (2- [2-(2,6-dichlorophenyl)aminophenyl]ethanoic acid), a nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drug, undergoes bioactivation by cytochrome P450 oxidation to chemically reactive metabolites that are capable of reacting with endogenous nucleophiles such as glutathione (GSH) and proteins and that may play a role in the idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity associated with the drug.
Here, we investigated the ability of diclofenac to be metabolized to 2-(2,6-dichloro-phenylamino)benzyl-S-thioether glutathione (DPAB-SG) in incubations with rat liver microsomes (RLMs) and human liver microsomes (HLMs) fortified with NADPH and GSH.
Thus, after incubation of diclofenac (50 microM) with liver microsomes (1 mg protein/ml), the presence of DPAB-SG was detected in both RLM and HLM incubation extracts by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry techniques.
The formation of DPAB-SG was NADPH-, concentration-, and time-dependent.
From these data, we propose that P450 3A4 mediates the oxidative decarboxylation of diclofenac, resulting in the formation of a transient benzylic carbon-centered free radical intermediate that partitions between elimination (o-imine methide production) and recombination (alcohol formation) pathways.
The benzyl alcohol intermediate, which was not analyzed for in the present studies, if formed could undergo dehydration to provide a reactive o-imine methide species.
The o-imine methide intermediate then is proposed to react covalently with GSH, forming DPAB-SG.
Coincubation of diclofenac (10 microM) with ketoconazole (1 microM), an inhibitor of cytochrome P450 (P450) 3A4, with HLMs led to a 75% decrease in DPAB-SG formation.
However, in contrast, coincubation with the P450 2C9 inhibitor sulfaphenazole (10 microM) or the P450 2D6 inhibitorquinidine (40 microM) led to a 1.9- and 1.6-fold increase in DPAB-SG production, respectively.
Stereoselective oxidation and glucuronidation of carvedilol in human liver and intestinal microsomes.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the mechanism for the stereoselective presystemic clearance of carvedilol.
We examined the oxidation and glucuronidation of carvedilol in human liver microsomes (HLM) and human intestinal microsomes (HIM).
The oxidation of carvedilol in HLM and HIM was evaluated in the presence of NADPH, whereas glucuronidation was evaluated in the presence of UDP-glucuronic acid.
Oxidation of S-carvedilol in HLM and HIM was greater than that of R-carvedilol.
Glucuronidation of S-carvedilol in HLM and HIM was also higher than that of R-carvedilol.
In addition, the oxidation of R-carvedilol in HLM was inhibited by quinidine, whereas that of S-carvedilol was inhibited by both quinidine and furafylline.
On the other hand, R- and S-carvediloloxidation in HIM was inhibited by ketoconazole.
These results suggested that cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 and CYP1A2 are involved in the stereoselective oxidation of carvedilol in the liver, that CYP3A4 is involved in intestinal oxidation, and that glucuronidation in the liver and intestine is at least partly responsible for stereoselective presystemic clearance.
CYP2D6 is primarily responsible for the metabolism of clomiphene.
Clomiphene is a first line treatment for anovulation, a common cause of infertility.
Response to clomiphene is variable and unpredictable.
Tamoxifen is structurally related to clomiphene, and also shows considerable variation in response.
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 are major contributors to the metabolism of tamoxifen.
The aim of the present work was to define the role of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in the in vitro metabolism of enclomiphene, regarded by some as the more active isomer of clomiphene.
Enclomiphene (25 microM) was incubated with human liver microsomes (from 4 extensive (EM) and 1 poor metaboliser with respect to CYP2D6) and with microsomes from lymphoblastoid cells expressing CYP2D6.
Microsomes from all the EM livers and recombinant CYP2D6 metabolised enclomiphene (the disappearance of drug ranged from (40-60%).
No metabolism was detected in microsomes from the PM liver.
The extent of enclomiphene metabolism was correlated with the amount of CYP2D6 present (p<0.001, Pearson correlation test).
The findings indicate that CYP2D6 is primarily responsible for the metabolism of enclomiphene.
Quinidine (1 microM) completely inhibited the metabolism of enclomiphene by all the EM livers and by recombinant CYP2D6 (p<0.001, one way ANOVA).
Ketoconazole (2 microM) had nosignificant effect on enclomiphene metabolismin 3 out of the 4 EM livers.
Identification of CYP3A4 as the primary cytochrome P450 responsible for the metabolism of tandospirone by human liver microsomes.
The present study was carried out to characterize the human P450 isoforms involved in the metabolism of tandospirone, an anxiolytic agent known for its superior efficacy and safety.
Among 11 yeast-expressed recombinant P450 isoforms tested, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 exhibited the highest tandospirone metabolic activity.
Although there was no qualitative difference between the two isoforms, a quantitative difference in metabolite profiling was found i.e., M4 (hydroxylation of the pyrimidine ring) was the major metabolite formed with CYP2D6 while M2 (hydroxylation of the norbornan ring) and 1-PP (oxidative cleavage of the butyl chain) predominated with CYP3A4.
The metabolite profile on incubation with CYP3A4 was qualitatively and quantitatively similar to that obtained with human liver microsomes.
In vitro intrinsic clearance (CLint) values derived from kinetic analysis using both P450 isoforms were similar (2.2 and 1.6 ml/min/nmol P450), but the hepatic content of CYP3A4 was found to be more abundant than that of CYP2D6.
These results indicate that the metabolism of tandospirone by human liver microsomes primarily involves CYP3A4, and to a lesser extent CYP2D6.
The in vitro metabolism of tandospirone by human liver microsomes was markedly inhibited by ketoconazole (a CYP3A4 inhibitor) but not by quinidine (a CYP2D6 inhibitor).
Phthalate induction of CYP3A4 is dependent on glucocorticoid regulation of PXR expression.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is responsible for oxidative metabolism of more than 60% of all pharmaceuticals.
CYP3A4 is inducible by xenobiotics that activate pregnane X receptor (PXR), and enhanced CYP3A4 activity has been implicated in adverse drug interactions.
Recent evidence suggest that the widely used plasticizer, di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP), and its primary metabolite mono-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (MEHP) may act as agonists for PXR.
Hospital patients are uniquely exposed to high levels of DEHP as well as being administered glucocorticoids.
Glucocorticoids positively regulate PXR expression in a glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-mediated mechanism.
Dex induced PXR protein expression in human hepatocytes and a liver-derived rat cell line.
Understanding the role of glucocorticoid regulation of PXR as a key determinant in the magnitude of CYP3A4 induction by xenobiotics may provide insight into adverse drug effects in a sensitive population.
We suggest that the magnitude of CYP3A4 induction by phthalates is dependent on the expression of PXR and may be significantly higher in the presence of glucocorticoids.
DEHP and MEHP induced PXR-mediated transcription of the CYP3A4 promoter in a dose-dependent fashion.
Coexposure to phthalates and dexamethasone (Dex) resulted in enhanced CYP3A4 promoter activity; furthermore, this induction was abrogated by both the GR antagonist RU486 and GR small interfering ribonucleic acid.
CYP3A4 protein was highly induced by Dex and DEHP coadministration in human hepatocyte cultures.
Finally, enhanced 6beta-hydroxytestosterone formation in Dex and phthalate cotreated human hepatocytes confirmed CYP3A4 enzyme induction.
Concomitant exposure to glucocorticoids and phthalates resulting in enhanced metabolic activity of CYP3A4may play a role in altered efficacy of pharmaceutical agents.
Metabolic interactions of agrochemicals in humans.
Agrochemicals and other xenobiotics are metabolized by xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (XMEs) to products that may be more or less toxic than the parent chemical.
In this regard, phase-I XMEs such as cytochrome P450s (CYPs) are of primary importance.
Interactions at the level of metabolism may take place via either inhibition or induction of XMEs.
Such interactions have often been investigated, in vitro, in experimental animals, using subcellular fractions such as liver microsomes, but seldom in humans or at the level of individual XME isoforms.
The authors have been investigating the metabolism of a number of agrochemicals by human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP isoforms and have recently embarked on studies of the induction of XMEs in human hepatocytes.
The insecticides chlorpyrifos, carbaryl, carbofuran and fipronil, as well as the repellant DEET, are all extensively metabolized by human liver microsomes and, although a number of CYP isoforms may be involved, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 are usually the most important.
Permethrin is hydrolyzed by esterase(s) present in both human liver microsomes and cytosol.
A number of metabolic interactions have been observed.
Chlorpyrifos and other phosphorothioates are potent inhibitors of the CYP-dependent metabolism of both endogenous substrates, such as testosterone and estradiol, and exogenous substrates, such as carbaryl, presumably as a result of the interaction of highly reactive sulfur, released during the oxidative desulfuration reaction, with the heme iron of CYP.
The hydrolysis of permethrin in human liver can be inhibited by chlorpyrifos oxon and by carbaryl.
Fipronil can inhibit testosterone metabolism by CYP3A4 and is an effective inducer of CYP isoforms in human hepatocytes.
Flavonoids diosmetin and luteolin inhibitmidazolammetabolism by human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP 3A4 and CYP3A5 enzymes.
We evaluated the effects of increasing concentrations of the flavonoids salvigenin, diosmetin and luteolin on the in vitro metabolism of midazolam (MDZ), a probe substrate for cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A enzymes, which is converted into 1'-hydroxy-midazolam (1'-OH-MDZ) and 4-hydroxy-midazolam (4-OH-MDZ) by human liver microsomes.
To assess whether any relationship exists between the physico-chemical characteristics of flavones and their effects on MDZ metabolism, we tested the effects of three other flavones (flavone, tangeretin, chrysin) on MDZ metabolism by human liver microsomes.
We also found close relationships between the maximum stimulatory or inhibitory effects of flavones on 1'-OH-MDZ and 4-OH-MDZ formation rates and their log of octanol/water partition coefficients (logP) or their total number of hydroxyl groups.
Salvigenin had only a modest effect on MDZmetabolism, whereas diosmetin and luteolin inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner the formation of both 1'-OH-MDZ and 4-OH-MDZ, with apparent K(i) values in the 30-50mumol range.
Both diosmetin and luteolindecreased 1'-OH-MDZ formation by human recombinant CYP3A4, but notCYP3A5, whereas they decreased 4-OH-MDZ formation by both recombinant enzymes.
Whereas flavones possessing more than two hydroxyl groups (luteolin, diosmetin) inhibited MDZ biotransformation, flavones lacking hydroxyl groups in their A and B rings (flavone, tangeretin) stimulatedMDZmetabolism.
The results of the study may be of clinical relevance since they suggest that luteolin and diosmetin may cause pharmacokinetic interactions with co-administered drugs metabolized via CYP3A.
Effect of Pyrethrins on cytochrome P450 forms in cultured rat and human hepatocytes.
High doses of Pyrethrins produce liver and thyroid gland tumours in rats by modes of action involving the induction of hepatic xenobiotic metabolising enzymes.
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of Pyrethrins with those of the rat liver and thyroid tumour promoter sodium Phenobarbital on some cytochrome P450 (CYP) forms in cultured rat and human hepatocytes.
The treatment of female Sprague-Dawley rat and human (both male and female) hepatocytes for 72 h with 0-1000 microMPyrethrins and 0-1000 microMPhenobarbital did not result in any marked cytotoxicity.
The effects of Pyrethrins and Phenobarbital were concentration-dependent and exhibited a threshold.
These results demonstrate that the effects of Pyrethrins on CYP forms in cultured rat and human hepatocytes are qualitatively similar to those of Phenobarbital.
While CYP form induction by Pyrethrins, Phenobarbital and related compounds can be associated with liver and thyroid gland tumour formation in rodents, epidemiological data for Phenobarbital suggests that such effects do not occur in humans.
In rat hepatocytes both Pyrethrins and Phenobarbital produced an induction of 7-benzyloxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin O-debenzylase activity (a CYP1A/2B form marker) and CYP2B1 and CYP2B1/2 mRNA levels.
Pyrethrins and Phenobarbital also inducedCYP3A-dependent testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase activity in rat hepatocytes.
In human hepatocytes Pyrethrins and Phenobarbitalinduced both testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase activity and CYP3A4 mRNA levels and also increased CYP2B6 mRNA levels.
PyrethrinsinduceCYP2B and CYP3A forms in cultured rat hepatocytes and can induceCYP3A and CYP2B forms in human hepatocytes.
Dexamethasone-mediated up-regulation of human CYP2A6 involves the glucocorticoid receptor and increased binding of hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha to the proximal promoter.
Human cytochrome P450 2A6 (CYP2A6) metabolizes various clinically relevant compounds, including nicotine- and tobacco-specific procarcinogens; however, transcriptional regulation of this gene is poorly understood.
We investigated the role of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in transcriptional regulation of CYP2A6.
Mutation of the HNF4-RE abrogated HNF4alpha- and DEX-mediated transactivation of CYP2A6.
Electrophoretic mobility shift, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and streptavidin DNA binding assays revealed that DEXincreased binding of HNF4alpha to the HNF4-RE and that an interaction of GR and HNF4alpha occurred at this site.
Moreover, ChIP assays indicated that histone H4 acetylation of the CYP2A6 proximal promoter chromatin was increased by DEX that may allow for increased binding of HNF4alpha to the HNF4-RE in human hepatocytes.
These findings indicate that increased expression of CYP2A6 by DEX is mediated by the GR via a nonconventional transcriptional mechanism involving interaction of HNF4alpha with an HNF4-RE rather than a glucocorticoid response element.
Dexamethasone (DEX)increased CYP2A6 mRNA and protein levels in human hepatocytes in primary culture.
This effect was attenuated by the GR receptor antagonist mifepristone (RU486; 17beta-hydroxy-11beta- [4-dimethylamino phenyl]-17alpha- [1-propynyl]estra-4,9-dien-3-one), suggesting that induction of CYP2A6 by DEX was mediated by the GR.
In gene reporter assays, DEX caused dose-dependent increases in luciferase activity that was also prevented by RU486 and progressive truncations of the CYP2A6 promoter delineated DEX-responsiveness to a -95 to +12 region containing an hepatic nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) alpha response element (HNF4-RE).
In addition, overexpression of HNF4alpha increased CYP2A6 transcriptional activity by 3-fold.
DEXincreased HNF4alpha mRNA levels by 4-fold; however, the amount of HNF4alpha nuclear protein was unaltered.
The inhibitory effect of tannic acid on cytochrome P450 enzymes and NADPH-CYP reductase in rat and human liver microsomes.
Tannic acid has been shown to decrease mutagenicity and/or carcinogenicity of several amine derivatives and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in rodents.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of tannic acid on cytochrome P450 (CYP)-catalyzed oxidations using rat liver microsomes (RLM) and human liver microsomes (HLM) as the enzyme sources.
These results suggested that the inhibition of CYP enzyme activities by tannic acidmay be partially attributed to its inhibition of NADPH-CYP reductase activity.
In RLM, tannic acid showed a non-selective inhibitory effect on 7-methoxyresorufin O-demethylation (MROD), 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (EROD), tolbutamide hydroxylation, p-nitrophenol hydroxylation and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activities with IC(50)values ranged from 14.9 to 27.4 microM.
In HLM, tannic acidinhibitedEROD, MROD and phenacetin O-deethylation activities with IC(50) values ranged from 5.1 to 7.5 microM, and diclofenac 4-hydroxylation, dextromethorphan O-demethylation, chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation with IC(50) values ranged from 20 to 77 microM.
In baculovirus-insect cell-expressed human CYP 1A1 and 1A2, the IC(50) values of tannic acid for CYP 1A1- and 1A2-catalyzedEROD activities were 23.1 and 2.3 microM, respectively, indicating that tannic acid preferably inhibited the activity of CYP1A2.
Tannic acid inhibited human CYP1A2 non-competitively with a Ki value of 4.8 microM.
Tannic acid was also found to inhibit NADPH-CYP reductase in RLM and HLM with IC(50) values of 11.8 and 17.4 microM, respectively.
Inhibitory effects of angiotensin receptor blockers on CYP2C9 activity in human liver microsomes.
We investigated the inhibitory effects of the angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), candesartan, irbesartan, losartan, losartan active metabolite (EXP-3174), olmesartan, telmisartan and valsartan (0.3-300 microM), on the CYP2C9 activity in human liver microsomes using (S)-(-)-warfarin as a typical CYP2C9 substrate.
A three-dimensional model for docking between EXP-3174 and CYP2C9 indicated that the chloro group of EXP-3174 is oriented to a hydrophobic pocket in the CYP2C9 active site, indicating that the lipophilicity of the group present in ARBs at the position corresponding to that of the hydroxyisopropyl group in olmesartan is important in inhibitingCYP2C9 activity.
Except for olmesartan and valsartan, these ARBs inhibited the activity of 7-hydroxylation of (S)-(-)-warfarin with IC50 values of 39.5-116 microM.
Of six synthetic derivatives of olmesartan, five compounds which possess either alkyl groups or a chloro group at the same position as that of the hydroxyisopropyl group in olmesartan inhibited CYP2C9 activity with IC50 values of 21.7-161 microM.
Olmesartan and the olmesartan analogue, RNH-6272, both having a hydroxyisopropyl group, showed no inhibition, indicating that the hydrophilicity of this group greatly contributes to the lack of CYP2C9 inhibition by these two compounds.
Identification of human liver cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in biotransformation of vicriviroc, a CCR5 receptor antagonist.
Vicriviroc (SCH 417690), a CCR5 receptor antagonist, is currently under investigation for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
The objective of this study was to identify human liver cytochrome P450 enzyme(s) responsible for the metabolism of vicriviroc.
Human liver microsomes metabolized vicriviroc via N-oxidation (M2/M3), O-demethylation (M15), N,N-dealkylation (M16), N-dealkylation (M41), and oxidation to a carboxylic acid metabolite (M35b/M37a).
The results of this study suggest that formation of the major vicriviroc metabolites in human liver microsomes is primarily mediated via CYP3A4.
These enzymology data will provide guidance to design clinical studies to address any potential drug-drug interactions.
Recombinant human CYP3A4  the formation of all these metabolites, whereas CYP3A5 catalyzed the formation of M2/M3 and M41.
CYP2C9 only catalyzed the formation of M15.
There was a high correlation between the rates of formation of M2/M3, M15, and M41, which was determined using 10 human liver microsomal samples and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation catalyzed by CYP3A4/5 (r > or = 0.91).
Ketoconazole and azamulin (inhibitors of CYP3A4) were potent inhibitors of the formation of M2/M3, M15, M41, and M35b/M37a from human liver microsomes.
A CYP3A4/5-specific monoclonal antibody (1 microg/microg of protein) inhibited the formation of all metabolites from human liver microsomes by 86 to 100%.
CYP2C9 and CYP3A5 most likely play a minor role in the biotransformation of this compound.
Kinetics of the time-dependent inactivation of CYP2D6 in cryopreserved human hepatocytes by methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA).
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) was investigated in cryopreserved human hepatocytes as a time-dependent inactivator (TDI) of CYP2D6 using dextromethorphan (DEX) as a probe substrate.
Inhibition kinetic parameters k(inact), the maximal rate of inactivation, and K(I), the inhibitor concentration at half the maximal activation rate, were determined.
Time- and concentration-dependent inhibition were confirmed, and the influence of different elements of study design (e.g. cell number, stability of hepatocytes, dilution after preincubation) on estimated kinetic parameters were evaluated.
Dilution factors (DF) of 1.2, 5 or total removal of inhibitor (by washing cells after preincubation, WR) resulted in k(inact) and K(I) (+/-S.E.) values of 0.02+/-0.002 min(-1) and 0.88+/-0.31 microM, 0.01+/-0.001 min(-1) and 1.23+/-0.70 microM, and 0.01+/-0.001 min(-1) and 2.10+/-1.32 microM, respectively; indicating that insufficient dilution may lead to overestimation of CYP2D6inactivation.
Inactivation efficiency in hepatocytes, as measured by k(inact)/K(I) , was 10-fold less than that previously reported in human liver microsomes or recombinantly expressed systems.
Possible causes for the observed differences between in vitro systems warrant further investigation.
These may include differences in metabolic consumption of MDMA in each system, non-specific binding and presence of active efflux in hepatocytes.
Accounting for MDMA depletion during the preincubation, corrected K(I) values were significantly lower (0.11+/-0.05 microM , 0.15+/-0.09 microM , 0.24+/-0.16 microM for DF of 1.2, 5, and WR, respectively).
Inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 by a pyrimidineimidazole: Evidence for complex heme interactions.
PH-302 inhibits the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) by coordinating with the heme of the monomeric form and preventing formation of the active dimer.
Inherent with the mechanism of pharmacology for this compound was the inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 (P450 3A4), observed from early ADME screening.
As expected, spectral binding analysis demonstrated that inhibition was a result of type II coordination to the P450 heme with the imidazole moiety of PH-302 , although only 72% of the maximal absorbance difference was achievable with PH-302 compared to that of the smaller ligand imidazole.
Time-dependent inhibition of P450 3A4 by PH-302 was also observed because of metabolite-inhibitory (MI) complex formation via metabolism of the methylenedioxyphenyl group.
Spectral characterization of the PH-302 MI complex demonstrated that formation began to plateau within 3 min, consistent with the kinetic profile of inactivation by PH-302 .
Meanwhile, spectral evidence for the imidazole-derived type II difference spectrum of PH-302 was captured simultaneously with the formation of the MI complex.
The presence of simultaneously operable type II coordination and rapidly saturable MI complex formation with heme by PH-302 indicates the presence of complex heme interactions with this unique molecule.
Information from these mechanistic studies adds to our understanding of the nature of P450 3A4 inhibition by PH-302 and provides a potentially useful tool compound for future studies investigating binding interactions in this important drug-metabolizing enzyme.
Further investigation showed that PH-302 inhibited P450 3A4 competitively with a Ki of approximately 2.0 microM against both midazolam and testosterone hydroxylation in human liver microsomes.
The profile for time-dependent inhibition in recombinant P450 3A4 was biphasic, and was kinetically characterized by a kinact of 0.08 min-1 and a Ki of 1.2 microM for the first phase (0-1.5 min) and a kinact of 0.06 min-1 and a Ki of 23.8 microM for the second phase (1.5-10 min).
Effects of serotonin-3 receptor antagonists on cytochrome P450 activities in human liver microsomes.
The effects of three serotonin-3 (5-HT(3)) receptor antagonists, azasetron , ondansetron, and ramosetron , on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2-mediated 7- ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation, CYP2C9-mediated tolbutamide hydroxylation, CYP2C19-mediated S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation, CYP2D6-mediated debrisoquine 4-hydroxylation, CYP2E1-mediated chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation, CYP3A4-mediated nifedipine oxidation, and CYP3A4-mediated testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activities in human liver microsomes were compared.
The free fractions of the three 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists in the incubation mixture estimated by ultracentrifugation were more than 68.6%.
These results suggest that azasetron, ondansetron, and ramosetron do not cause clinically significant interactions with other drugs that are metabolized by CYPs via the inhibition of metabolism .
Azasetron and ramosetron at a concentration of 1 or 10 muM neither inhibited nor stimulated any of the metabolic activities.
On the other hand, ondansetron competitively inhibited CYP1A2 and CYP2D6 activities, and the inhibition constants (K(i) ) were 3.2 and 21.0 muM , respectively, which are much higher than the reported plasma concentrations after clinical intravenous or oral dosing.
Inhibitory effects of cytostatically active 6-aminobenzo [c]phenanthridines on cytochrome P450 enzymes in human hepatic microsomes.
Besides assays for the evaluation of efficacy new drug candidates have to undergo extensive testings for enhancement of pharmaceutical drug safety and optimization of application.
The objective of the present work was to investigate the pharmacokinetic drug drug interaction potential for the cytostatically active 6-aminobenzo [c]phenanthridines BP-11 (6-amino-11,12-dihydro-11-(4-hydroxy-3,5-dimethoxyphenyl)benzo [c]phenanthridine) and BP-D7 (6-amino-11-(3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl)benzo [c]phenanthridine) in vitro through incubation with human hepatic microsomes and marker substrates.
For these studies the cytochrome P-450 isoenzymes and corresponding marker substrates recommended by the EMEA (The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products) were chosen.
In detail these selective substrates were caffeine (CYP1A2), coumarin (CYP2A6), tolbutamide (CYP2C9), S-(+)-mephenytoin (CYP2C19), dextromethorphane (CYP2D6), chlorzoxazone (CYP2E1) and testosterone (CYP3A4).
Incubations with each substrate were carried out without a possible inhibitor and in the presence of a benzo [c]phenanthridine or a selective inhibitor at varying concentrations.
Marker activities were determined by HPLC (high performance liquid chromatography).
For the isoenzymes showing more than 50% inhibition by the addition of 20 microM BP-11 or BP-D7 additional concentrations of substrate and inhibitor were tested for a characterization of the inhibition.
The studies showed a moderate risk for BP-11 for interactions with the cytochrome P-450 isoenzymes CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4.
BP-D7 , the compound with the highest cytotstatic efficacy, showed only a moderate risk for interactions with drugs, also metabolized by CYP3A4.
In vitro studies on quetiapine metabolism using the substrate depletion approach with focus on drug-drug interactions.
The metabolism of the atypical antipsychotic quetiapine was investigated by in vitro methods.
Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined in human liver microsomes and recombinant cytochrome P450 measuring substrate depletion and product formation.
The isozyme CYP2D6 played a minor role in the metabolism of quetiapine as CYP3A4 contributed 89% to the overall metabolism .
A Km value of 18 microM was determined by substrate depletion, suggesting linear kinetics under therapeutic conditions.
The cytochrome P450 isozymes CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 displayed activity towards quetiapine.
Drugs known to inhibit CYP3A4, such as ketoconazole and nefazodone, displayed almost complete inhibition at low concentrations, whereas inhibitors of CYP2D6 do not seem to have a clinically relevant effect.
The CYP2C8 inhibitor gemfibrozil does not increase the plasma concentrations of zopiclone.
Zopiclone is a short acting hypnotic, which is metabolised by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and 2C8 in vitro.
We studied the possible effect of gemfibrozil, an inhibitor of CYP2C8, on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of zopiclone.
In a randomised 2-phase crossover study, 10 healthy volunteers took 600 mggemfibrozil or placebo orally twice daily for 3 days.
On day 3, each ingested a 7.5 mg dose of zopiclone.
Plasma concentrations and urinary excretion of zopiclone and its two primary metabolites, plasma gemfibrozil, and psychomotor performance were measured.
The effects of CYP2C8, CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 inhibitors on the depletion of zopiclone (500 nM) were studied in vitro in human liver microsomes.
Accordingly, CYP2C8 does not significantly metabolise zopiclone in vivo.
However, as gemfibrozil raises the concentrations of two potentially active metabolites of zopiclone, slightly enhanced effects of zopiclone by gemfibrozil can not be excluded.
The pharmacokinetic variables of the parent zopiclone were not significantly affected by gemfibrozil.
However, gemfibrozil raised the mean peak plasma concentration (C(max)) of N-oxide-zopiclone (1.6-fold; P<0.001) and that of N-desmethyl-zopiclone (1.2-fold; P<0.001).
The mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC(0)-infinity) values of N-oxide-zopiclone and N-desmethyl-zopiclone were raised 2-fold (P<0.001) and 1.2-fold (P<0.01), respectively.
The renal clearance of N-oxide-zopiclone was reduced by 48%/cons by gemfibrozil (P<0.001).
The pharmacodynamic effects of zopiclone, measured using psychometric tests, were not affected by gemfibrozil.
In vitro, ketoconazole (1 microM) and itraconazole (8 microM) decreased the elimination rate of zopiclone enantiomers by about 65-95% while montelukast (16 microM), gemfibrozil (200 microM) and sulfaphenazole (10 microM) had no appreciable effect.
Gemfibrozil does not increase the plasma concentrations of the parent zopiclone.
Evaluation of time-dependent cytochrome P450 inhibition using cultured human hepatocytes.
Primary human hepatocytes in culture are commonly used to evaluate cytochrome P450 (P450) induction via an enzyme activity endpoint.
However, other processes can confound data interpretation.
To this end, the impact of time-dependent P450 inhibition in this system was evaluated.
Using a substrate-cassette approach, P450 activities were determined after incubation with the prototypic inhibitors tienilic acid (CYP2C9), erythromycin, troleandomycin, and fluoxetine (CYP3A4).
Kinetic analysis of enzyme inactivation in hepatocytes was used to describe the effect of these time-dependent inhibitors and derive the inhibition parameters kinact and KI ) which generally were in good agreement with the values derived using recombinant P450s and human liver microsomes (HLMs).
This work demonstrates that caution is warranted in the interpretation of enzyme induction studies with metabolically stable, weak time-dependent inhibitors , which may have dramatic inhibitory effects on P450 activity in this system.
Therefore, in addition to enzyme activity, mRNA and/or protein levels should be measured to fully evaluate the P450 induction potential of a drug candidate.
Tienilic acid selectively inhibited CYP2C9-dependent diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation activity, and erythromycin, troleandomycin, and fluoxetine inhibited CYP3A4-dependent midazolam 1'-hydroxylation in a time- and concentration-dependent manner.
Fluoxetine also inhibited CYP2C19-dependent S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation in a time- and concentration-dependent manner in hepatocytes, HLMs, and recombinant CYP2C19 (KI0.4 microM and kinact 0.5 min(-1)).
As expected, the effect of fluoxetine on CYP2D6 in hepatocytes was consistent with potent yet reversible inhibition.
A very weak time-dependent CYP2C9 inhibitor (AZ1, a proprietary AstraZeneca compound; KI 30 microM and kinact 0.02 min(-1)) effectively abolished CYP2C9 activity over 24 h at low (micromolar) concentrations in primary cultured human hepatocytes.
Identification of human liver cytochrome P450 enzymes responsible for the metabolism of lonafarnib (Sarasar).
Lonafarnib (Sarasar) , a farnesyl transferase inhibitor , is currently under development for the treatment of solid tumors.
Incubation of lonafarnib with human liver microsomes resulted in the formation of four oxidative metabolites (M1, M2, M3, and M4).
minor to trace levels of these metabolites were detected in humans after multiple-dose administration of lonafarnib .
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analyses exhibited a mass to charge ratio (m/z) for the (M+H)(+) ion of M1, M2, M3, and M4 at 653, 635, 669, and 653 Th, respectively.
These metabolites, respectively, resulted from changes of +O, -2H, +2O, and +O relative to lonafarnib .
In conclusion, the formation of metabolites M1, M2, and M3 from lonafarnib was mediated via CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.
Recombinant human CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 exhibited catalytic activity with respect to the formation of M1, M2, and M3, whereas CYP2C8 exhibited catalytic activity with respect to the formation of M4.
There was a high correlation between the formation of M1, determined in 10 human liver microsomal samples, and 6beta-hydroxylation of testosterone  by CYP3A4/5 (r = 0.93).
The IC(50) values of ketoconazole for inhibition of M1 and M2 were 0.61 and 0.92 microM, respectively.
The formation of M4 by human liver microsomes was inhibited72% by 50 microMquercetin, suggesting that the formation of M4 was mediated via CYP2C8.
A CYP3A4/5-specific inhibitory monoclonal antibody inhibited the formation of M1, M2, and M3 by 85, 75, and 100%, respectively.
In vitro inhibitory effect of 1-aminobenzotriazole on drug oxidations in human liver microsomes: a comparison with SKF-525A .
1-Aminobenzotriazole (ABT) is extensively used as a non-specific cytochrome P450 (CYP) inhibitor.
In this study, the inhibitory effect of ABT on CYP-dependent drug oxidations was investigated in human liver microsomes (HLM) and compared with that of SKF-525A, another non-specific inhibitor.
The following probe activities for human CYP isoforms were determined using pooled HLM: phenacetin O-deethylation (CYP1A2); diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9); S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation, (CYP2C19); bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation (CYP2D6); chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1); midazolam 1'-hydroxylation, nifedipine oxidation, and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A).
The inhibitory effects of ABT and SKF-525A were increased by preincubation in some probe reactions, and this preincubation effect was greater in ABT than in SKF-525A .
In conclusion, ABT and SKF-525A had a wide range of IC50 values in inhibiting the drug oxidations by HLM with and without preincubation.
ABT had the strongest inhibitory effect on the CYP3A-dependent drug oxidations and the weakest effect on the diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation.
SKF-525A potently inhibited the bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, but weakly inhibited chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation.
The remarkable IC50 shift (> 10 times) by preincubation with ABT was observed on the phenacetin O-deethylation, chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation, and midazolam 1'-hydroxylation.
Effect of the St. John's wort constituent hyperforin on docetaxel metabolism by human hepatocyte cultures.
St. John's wort is a commonly used herbal medication that increases cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) activity.
Because docetaxel is inactivated by CYP3A, we studied the effects of the St. John's wort constituent hyperforin on docetaxel metabolism in a human hepatocyte model.
Hepatocytes, isolated from three donor livers, were exposed to hyperforin (0.1, 0.5, or 1.5 micromol/L) or rifampin (10 micromol/L) for 48 hours.
After 48 hours, hyperforin- or rifampin-containing medium was replaced with medium containing 100 micromol/L docetaxel.
After 1 hour, docetaxel metabolism was characterized by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.
Subsequent incubations characterized the specific cytochrome P450s that produced the docetaxel metabolites observed in hepatocyte incubations.
Docetaxel metabolites identified in rifampin- and hyperforin-treated hepatocyte preparations included the previously described tert-butyl-hydroxylated metabolite and two previously unidentified metabolites involving hydroxylation on the baccatin ring.
CYP3A4 produced the tert-butyl-hydroxylated metabolite and the two ring-hydroxylated metabolites.
CYP2C8 produced one of the newly described ring-hydroxylated metabolites.
This implies that subtherapeutic docetaxel concentrations may result when docetaxel is administered to patients using St. John's wort on a chronic basis.
The results also show induction of previously undescribed metabolic pathways for docetaxel, one of which may be analogous to the known 6-alpha-hydroxylation of paclitaxel by CYP2C8.
Rifampin induced docetaxel metabolism 6.8- to 32-fold above docetaxel metabolism in control cultures.
Hyperforin induced docetaxel metabolism in all three hepatocyte preparations.
Hyperforin induction was dose-dependent and, at maximum, was 2.6- to 7-foldgreater than that in controls.
Exposure to the St. John's wort constituent hyperforin induces docetaxel metabolism in vitro.
Metabolism of repaglinide by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 in vitro: effect of fibrates and rifampicin .
Repaglinide is an antidiabetic drug metabolised by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 and CYP3A4 enzymes.
To clarify the mechanisms of observed repaglinide drug interactions, we determined the contribution of the two enzymes to repaglinide metabolism at different substrate concentrations, and examined the effect of fibrates and rifampicin on CYP2C8, CYP3A4 and repaglinide metabolism in vitro.
We studied repaglinide metabolism using pooled human liver microsomes, recombinant CYP2C8 and recombinant CYP3A4 enzymes.
The effect of quercetin and itraconazole on repaglinide metabolism , and of gemfibrozil, bezafibrate, fenofibrate and rifampicin on CYP2C8 (paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylation) and CYP3A4 (midazolam 1-hydroxylation) activities and repaglinide metabolism were studied using human liver microsomes.
At therapeutic repaglinide concentrations (<0.4 microM), CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 metabolised repaglinide at similar rates.
In conclusion, both CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 are important in the metabolism of therapeutic concentrations of repaglinide in vitro, but their predicted contributions in vivo are highly dependent on the scaling factor used.
Quercetin (25 microM) and itraconazole (3 microM) inhibited the metabolism of 0.2 microM repaglinide by 58% and 71%, and that of 2 microM repaglinide by 56% and 59%, respectively.
The three fibrates inhibited CYP2C8 (Ki: bezafibrate 9.7 microM , gemfibrozil 30.4 microM and fenofibrate 92.6 microM) and repaglinide metabolism (IC50 : bezafibrate 37.7 microM, gemfibrozil 111 microM and fenofibrate 164 microM), but had no effect on CYP3A4.
Rifampicin inhibited CYP2C8 (Ki 30.2 microM ), CYP3A4 (Ki 18.5 microM ) and repaglinide metabolism (IC5013.7 microM ).
Gemfibrozil is only a moderate inhibitor of CYP2C8 and does not inhibit CYP3A4 ; inhibition of CYP-enzymes by parent gemfibrozil alone does not explain its interaction with repaglinide in vivo.
Rifampicin competitively inhibits both CYP2C8 and CYP3A4, which can counteract its inducing effect in humans.
Effect of antifungal drugs on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 activities in human liver microsomes.
The effects of five antifungal drugs, fluconazole, itraconazole, micafungin, miconazole, and voriconazole, on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9-mediated tolbutamide hydroxylation, CYP2C19-mediated S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation, and CYP3A4-mediated nifedipine oxidation activities in human liver microsomes were compared.
In addition, the effects of preincubation were estimated to investigate the mechanism-based inhibition.
The IC50 value of voriconazole against nifedipine oxidation was comparable with that of fluconazole and micafungin and higher than that of itraconazole and miconazole.
The stimulation of the inhibition of CYP2C9-, CYP2C19-, or CYP3A4-mediated reactions by 15-min preincubation was not observed for any of the antifungal drugs, suggesting that these drugs are not mechanism-based inhibitors .
The IC50 value against tolbutamide hydroxylation was the lowest for miconazole(2.0 microM) , followed by voriconazole (8.4 microM) and fluconazole(30.3 microM).
Similarly, the IC50 value against S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation was the lowest for miconazole(0.33 microM), followed by voriconazole(8.7 microM) and fluconazole(12.3 microM) .
On the other hand, micafungin at a concentration of 10 or 25 microM neither inhibited nor stimulatedtolbutamide hydroxylation and S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation, and the IC50 values for itraconazole against these were greater than 10 microM .
These results suggest that miconazole is the strongest inhibitor of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, followed by voriconazole and fluconazole, whereas micafungin would not cause clinically significant interactions with other drugs that are metabolized by CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 via the inhibition of metabolism.
Contribution of human hepatic cytochrome p450 isoforms to the metabolism of psychotropic drugs.
The metabolic activities of six psychotropic drugs, diazepam, clotiazepam, tofisopam , etizolam , tandospirone , and imipramine, were determined for 14 isoforms of recombinant human hepatic cytochrome P450s (CYPs) and human liver microsomes by measuring the disappearance rate of parent compounds.
In vitro kinetic studies revealed that Vmax/Km values in human liver microsomes were the highest for tofisopam , followed by tandospirone > clotiazepam > imipramine , diazepam, and etizolam .
Among the recombinant CYPs, CYP3A4 exhibited the highest metabolic activities of all compounds except for clotiazepam and imipramine.
These results suggest that the psychotropic drugs investigated are metabolized predominantly by CYP3A4, except that CYP2D6 catalyzes the metabolism of imipramine.
In addition, this approach based on the disappearance rate appears to be useful for the identification of the responsible CYP isoform(s) of older drugs, for which metabolic profiles have not been reported.
The metabolism of clotiazepam was catalyzed by CYP2B6, CYP3A4, CYP2C18, and CYP2C19, and imipramine was metabolized by CYP2D6 most efficiently.
In addition, the metabolic activities of diazepam, clotiazepam, and etizolam in human liver microsomes were inhibited by 2.5 microM ketoconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor , by 97.5%, 65.1%, and 83.5%, respectively, and the imipramine metabolism was not detected after the addition of 1 or 10 microM quinidine, a CYP2D6 inhibitor .
Rate-limiting biotransformation of triamterene is mediated by CYP1A2.
Triamterene (TA), a potassium-sparing diuretic, is extensively metabolized by hydroxylation in 4'-position and subsequent conjugation by cytosolic sulfotransferases.
To identify the cytochrome P450 enzyme(s) catalyzing hydroxylation of triamterene (the rate-limiting step in the formation of the sulfate ester (STA)), in vitro incubation studies were performed with human liver microsomes.
Initial rates of TA hydroxylation (0 - 300 microM) were determined during a ten-minute-incubation period with liver microsomes of two donors.
The role of individual CYP enzymes was determined by pre-incubation with selective inhibitors/alternative substrates .
Vice versa, the effect of TA (0 - 500 microM) on 3-demethylation of caffeine (0 - 1,000 microM) was assessed.
Metabolite concentrations were estimated by reversed-phase HPLC methods.
TA Km values without inhibitors were 60 and 142 microM , Vmax was 177 and 220 pmol/min/mg protein, respectively.
4'-hydroxylation of TA in humans appears to be mediated exclusively by CYP1A2.
Inhibition or induction of CYP1A2 will change the time course of both TA and its active phase-II metabolite.
The net pharmacodynamic effect of such changes is difficult to predict and needs to be evaluated in clinical studies.
Mean inhibitor induced changes of 4'-hydroxy-TA formation were as follows: Furafylline25 microM (CYP1A2), complete inhibition (-100%); omeprazole250 microM (CYP1A2 inhibitor / CYP2C 19 substrate), -30%; coumarin 25 microM (CYP2A6), -11%; quinidine 25 microM (CYP2D6), -9%; ketoconazole 25 microM (CYP3A), -18%; and erythromycin250 microM (CYP3A), -8%.
In the reverse inhibition studies, TA competitively inhibited caffeine 3-demethylation with Ki values of 65 and 111 microM , respectively.
A potentially significant interaction between efavirenz and phenytoin: a case report and review of the literature.
Although it has not been demonstrated yet, phenytoin is expected to reduce efavirenz exposure through coinduction of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and CYP2B6.
Conversely, efavirenz has been shown in vitro to inhibit the enzymes responsible for phenytoin metabolism , CYP2C9 and CYP2C19.
We report a case in which a potential bidirectional drug interaction between phenytoin and efavirenz resulted in lower-than-expected efavirenz concentrations and elevated phenytoin levels.
Therapeutic drug monitoring was used in this case to ensure adequate efavirenz exposure.
()
Chlorpropamide 2-hydroxylation is catalysed by CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in vitro: chlorpropamide disposition is influenced by CYP2C9, but not by CYP2C19 genetic polymorphism.
We evaluated the involvement of cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms 2C9 and 2C19 in chlorpropamide 2-hydroxylation in vitro and in chlorpropamide disposition in vivo.
To identify CYP isoforms(s) that catalyse 2-hydroxylation of chlorpropamide, the incubation studies were conducted using human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP isoforms.
To evaluate whether genetic polymorphisms of CYP2C9 and/or CYP2C19 influence the disposition of chlorpropamide, a single oral dose of 250 mgchlorpropamide was administered to 21 healthy subjects pregenotyped for CYP2C9 and CYP2C19.
In human liver microsomal incubation studies, the formation of 2-hydroxychlorpropamide (2-OH-chlorpropamide), a major chlorpropamide metabolite in human, has been best described by a one-enzyme model with estimated K(m) and V(max) of 121.7 +/- 19.9 microm and 16.1 +/- 5.0 pmol min(-1) mg(-1) protein, respectively.
In incubation studies using human recombinant CYP isoforms, however, 2-OH-chlorpropamide was formed by both CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 with similar intrinsic clearances (CYP2C9 vs. CYP2C19: 0.26 vs. 0.22 microl min(-1) nmol(-1) protein).
In in vivo clinical trials, eight subjects with the CYP2C9*1/*3 genotype exhibited significantly lower nonrenal clearance [*1/*3 vs.*1/*1: 1.8 +/- 0.2 vs. 2.4 +/- 0.1 ml h(-1) kg(-1), P < 0.05; 95% confidence interval (CI) on the difference 0.2, 1.0] and higher metabolic ratios (of chlorpropamide/2-OH-chlorpropamide in urine: *1/*3 vs.*1/*1: 1.01 +/- 0.19 vs. 0.56 +/- 0.08, P < 0.05; 95% CI on the difference - 0.9, - 0.1) than did 13 subjects with CYP2C9*1/*1 genotype.
In contrast, no differences in chlorpropamide pharmacokinetics were observed for subjects with the CYP2C19 extensive metabolizer vs. poor metabolizer genotypes.
These results suggest that chlorpropamide disposition is principally determined by CYP2C9 activity in vivo, although both CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 have a catalysing activity of chlorpropamide 2-hydroxylation pathway.
Formation of 2-OH-chlorpropamide in human liver microsomes was significantly inhibited by sulfaphenazole ,but not by S-mephenytoin, ketoconazole, quinidine, or furafylline.
Different effects of desipramine on bufuralol 1''-hydroxylation by rat and human CYP2D enzymes.
Inhibitory effects of desipramine (DMI) on rat and human CYP2D enzymes were studied using bufuralol (BF) 1''-hydroxylation as an index.
Inhibition was examined under the following two conditions: 1) DMI was co-incubated with BF and NADPH in the reaction mixture containing rat or human liver microsomes or yeast cell microsomes expressing rat CYP2D1, CYP2D2 or human CYP2D6 (co-incubation); 2) DMI was preincubated with NADPH and the same enzyme sources prior to adding the substrate (preincubation).
When either rat liver microsomes or recombinant CYP2D2 was employed, the preincubation with DMI (0.3 microM) caused a greaterinhibition of BF 1''-hydroxylation than the co-incubation did, whereas BF 1''-hydroxylation by rat CYP2D1 was not markedly affected under the same conditions.
Kinetic studies demonstrated that the inhibition-type changed from competitive for the co-incubation to noncompetitive for the preincubation in the case of CYP2D2, whereas the inhibition-type was competitive for both the co-incubation and the preincubation in the case of CYP2D6.
Furthermore, the loss of activity of rat CYP2D2 under the preincubation conditions followed pseudo-first-order kinetics.
Binding experiments employing the recombinant enzymes and [(3)H]-DMI revealed that CYP2D2 and CYP2D6 were the only prominent proteins to which considerable radioactive DMI metabolite(s) bound.
These results indicate that rat CYP2D2 biotransforms DMI into reactive metabolite(s), which covalently bind to CYP2D2, resulting in inactivation of the enzyme.
In contrast, human CYP2D6may also biotransform DMI into some metabolite(s) that covalently bind to CYP2D6, but that do not inactivate the enzyme.
The inhibitory effect of DMI on BF 1''-hydroxylation by human liver microsomal fractions or recombinant CYP2D6 was much lower than that on the hydroxylation by rat liver microsomes or CYP2D2.
Cytochrome P450-dependent metabolism of gefitinib.
The in vitro metabolism of [(14)C]-gefitinib (1-3 microM) was investigated using human liver microsomes and a range of expressed human cytochrome P450 enzymes, with particular focus on the formation of O-desmethyl-gefitinib (M523595) , the major metabolite observed in human plasma.
High-performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet light, radiochemical and mass spectral analysis, together with the availability of authentic standards, enabled quantification and structural identification of metabolites.
On incubation with pooled human liver microsomes, [(14)C]-gefitinib underwent rapid and extensive metabolism to a number of metabolites, although M523595 was only a minor microsomal product.
Gefitinib was metabolized extensively by expressed CYP3A4, producing a similar range of metabolites to liver microsomes, but M523595 was not formed.
CYP1A2, 2C9 and 2C19 produced no measurable metabolism of gefitinib ,while CYP3A5 produced a range of metabolites similar to CYP3A4, but to a much lower degree.
While formation of M523595 was CYP2D6 mediated, the overall metabolism of gefitinib was dependent primarily on CYP3A4, and this was not obviously diminished in liver microsomes from CYP2D6 poor metabolizers.
Formation of most metabolites was markedlydecreased by ketoconazole, but M523595 production was inhibited only by quinidine.
In contrast, CYP2D6 catalysed rapid and extensive metabolism of gefitinib to M523595 .
Comparative effects of fibrates on drug metabolizing enzymes in human hepatocytes.
The induction potential of different fibric acid derivatives on human drug metabolizing enzymes was evaluated to help assess the role of enzyme induction on pharmacokinetic drug interactions.
Effects of gemfibrozil, fenofibric acid , and clofibric acid on expression levels of cytochromes P450 (CYPs) 3A4 and 2C8 and UDP-glucuronyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 were evaluated in primary human hepatocyte cultures.
The potential for these fibrates to activate human pregnane X receptor (PXR) also was studied in a cell-based PXR reporter gene assay.
On average, the effects on CYP3A4 were less than (< or =30% of rifampin), while those on CYP2C8 and UGT1A1 were comparable to or slightly higher than (up to 200% of rifampin) the corresponding effects observed with rifampin (10 microM).
No significantactivation on human pregnane X receptor (PXR) was observed with the three fibrates in a PXR reporter gene assay.
In this system, all fibrates are weak inducers of UGT1A1.
The enzyme inducing effects of fibrates appear to be mediated via a mechanism(s) other than PXR activation.
These results suggest that fibrates may have potential to cause various pharmacokinetic drug interactions via their differential effects on enzyme induction and/or inhibition.
All three fibrates caused increases in mRNA levels of CYP3A4 (2- to 5-fold), CYP2C8 (2- to 6-fold), and UGT1A1 (2- to 3-fold).
Consistent with the mRNA results, all fibrates caused moderate (approximately 2- to 3-fold) increases in CYP3A4 activity (measured by testosterone 6beta hydroxylase), as compared to about a 10-fold increase by rifampin.
significant increases (3- to 6-fold) in amodiaquine N-deethylase (a functional probe for CYP2C8 activity) also were observed with clofibric acid , fenofibric acid , and rifampin, in agreement with the mRNA finding.
However, in contrast to the mRNA induction, markeddecreases (>60%) in CYP2C8 activity were obtained with gemfibrozil treatment.
Consistent with this finding, co-incubation of amodiaquine with gemfibrozil but not with fenofibric acid , clofibric acid , or rifampin,in human liver microsomes or hepatocytes resulted in significantlydecreasedamodiaquine N-deethylase activity (IC50 = 80 microM for gemfibrozil, >500 microM for fenofibric or clofibric acid, and >50 microM for rifampin).
Similar to rifampin, all three fibrates caused a modest change in the glucuronidation of chrysin , a nonspecific substrate of UGTs.
In human hepatocytes, both fenofibric acid and clofibric acid are inducers of CYP3A4 and CYP2C8.
Gemfibrozil is also an inducer of CYP3A4, but acts as both an inducer and an inhibitor of CYP2C8.
Identification of human P450 isoforms involved in the metabolism of the antiallergic drug, oxatomide , and its kinetic parameters and inhibition constants.
Oxatomide is an antiallergic drug used for the treatment of diseases mediated by type I allergy.
Recently, terfenadine and astemizole, which have antiallergic actions similar to those of oxatomide , showed side effects on the cardiovascular system.
This might be because concomitant drugs such as itraconazole inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), the enzyme responsible for the degradation of terfenadine and astemizole, and thus the blood concentrations of the drugs are abnormally increased.
In another article of this issue, we have reported that oxatomide is metabolized by CYP2D6-Val and CYP3A4, and simultaneously inhibits the metabolism of the model substrates for these enzymes.
In this study, we performed the kinetic analysis of oxatomide metabolism using microsomes prepared from human liver, and found that the Km and Vmax values were 26.1 microM and 1254.4 pmol/mg protein/min, respectively.
These observations, together with the finding that the putative highest concentration of oxatomide in blood was congruent with 40 ng/ml ( congruent with 93 nM) at 4 h after each dosage during consecutive 6-d administration, encouraged us to conclude that oxatomide won't inhibit CYP2D6 or CYP3A4 at clinical doses.
Ketoconazole, one of the representative inhibitors for CYP3A4, potently inhibited the metabolism of oxatomide,but other well-known CYP inhibitor did not show significant inhibition .
These results suggest that the metabolism of oxatomide is principally catalyzed by CYP3A4.
Furthermore, oxatomide inhibited the metabolism of (+/-) bufuralol and testosterone, model substrates for CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, respectively, in a dose-dependent manner with the Ki values of 57.4 and 24.3 microM, respectively.
Cytochrome P450 3A-mediated metabolism of buspirone in human liver microsomes.
This study was carried out to determine the metabolic pathways of buspirone and cytochrome P450 (P450) isoform(s) responsible for buspirone metabolism in human liver microsomes (HLMs).
Buspirone mainly underwent N-dealkylation to 1-pyrimidinylpiperazine (1-PP), N-oxidation on the piperazine ring to buspirone N-oxide (Bu N-oxide), and hydroxylation to 3'-hydroxybuspirone (3'-OH-Bu), 5-hydroxybuspirone (5-OH-Bu), and 6'-hydroxybuspirone (6'-OH-Bu) in HLMs.
The apparent K(m) values for buspirone metabolite formation in pooled HLMs were 8.7 (1-PP), 34.0 (Bu N-oxide), 4.3 (3'-OH-Bu), 11.4/514 (5-OH-Bu), and 8.8 microM (6'-OH-Bu).
Recombinant CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP2D6 exhibited buspironeoxidation activities among nine P450 isoforms tested.
The overall metabolism rate of 5 microMbuspirone by CYP3A4 was 18-foldgreater than that by CYP2D6 and 35-foldgreater than that by CYP3A5.
The metabolism rates of buspirone in CYP2D6 poor-metabolizer genotype HLMs were comparable to those in pooled HLMs.
Taken together, these data suggest that CYP3A, mostly likely CYP3A4, is primarily responsible for the metabolism of buspirone in HLMs.
CYP3A inhibitor ketoconazole (1 microM) completely inhibited the formation of all major metabolites in HLMs (0-16% of control),whereas the chemical inhibitor selective to other P450 isoforms had little or no inhibitory effect.
In a panel of HLMs from 16 donors, buspirone metabolism correlated well CYP3A activity (r2 = 0.85-0.96, rho < 0.0005),but not the activities of other P450 isoforms.
Characterization of human cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the in vitro metabolism of perospirone .
In vitro studies were carried out to identify the major contribution of CYP2C8, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 to the metabolism of perospirone (cis-N- [4- [4-(1,2-benzisothiazol-3-yl)-1-piperazinyl]butyl]cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboximide monohydrochloride dehydrate), a novel antipsychotic agent, using human liver microsomes and expressed P450 isoforms.
With expressed P450s, K(m) and V(max) values were 1.09 microM and 1.93 pmol/min/pmol P450 for CYP2C8, 1.38 microM and 5.73 pmol/min/pmol P450 for CYP2D6, and 0.245 microM and 61.3 pmol/min/pmol P450 for CYP3A4, respectively.
Quinidine (a specific inhibitor of CYP2D6) did not markedly affect the metabolism of perospirone ,whereas quercetin (an inhibitor of CYP2C8) and ketoconazole (an inhibitor of CYP3A4) caused a decrease in the metabolism with human liver microsomes in a concentration dependent fashion.
With 10 microMquercetin, the metabolism of perospirone was inhibited by 60.0% and with 1 microMketoconazole almost complete inhibition was apparent.
Anti-CYP2C8 and anti-CYP2D6 antisera did not exert marked effects, whereas anti-CYP3A4 antiserum caused almost complete inhibition.
These results indicated that the metabolism of perospirone in human liver was mainly catalysed by CYP3A4, and to a lesser extent CYP2C8 and CYP2D6 were responsible because kinetic data (K(m) and V(max)) of CYP2C8 and CYP2D6 suggested catalytic potential.
CYP isoforms involved in the metabolism of clarithromycin in vitro: comparison between the identification from disappearance rate and that from formation rate of metabolites.
To clarify whether CYP2C19 is involved in the overall metabolism of clarithromycin (CAM) or not, in vitro studies using human liver microsomes and recombinant CYPs were performed by an approach based on the disappearance rate of parent compound from the incubation mixture.
In addition, the results of disappearance rate were compared with those obtained from the formation rates of the major metabolites of CAM , 14-(R)-hydroxy-CAM and N-demethyl-CAM .
These results were fairly consistent with those obtained from the conventional approach based on the formation of major metabolites of CAM.
Comparison of the kinetic parameters estimated from the disappearance rate of CAM and the formation rates of 14-(R)-hydroxy-CAM and N-demethyl-CAM indicates that N-demethylation and 14-(R)-hydroxylation account for 65% of CL(int) derived from the disappearance of CAM in human liver microsomes.
A combination of the disappearance rate of a parent compound and the formation rate of metabolites appears to be a useful approach for estimating the percentage contribution of the formation of metabolites to the overall metabolic clearance of a parent compound in vitro.
The intrinsic clearance (CL(int)) values determined from the disappearance of CAM in nine different human liver microsomes were highly correlated with the testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activity (r=0.957, p<0.001).
The CL(int) of CAM was markedly reduced by selective inhibitors of CYP3A4 (ketoconazole and troleandomycin) and by polyclonal antibodies raised against CYP3A4/5 in human liver microsomes.
Among the 11 isoforms of recombinant human CYP, only CYP3A4 revealed the metabolic activity for the disappearance of CAM .
The findings suggest that CYP3A4 plays a predominant role in the overall metabolic clearance of CAM as well as in the formation of 14-(R)-hydroxy-CAM and N-demethyl-CAM .
CYP2C19 does not appear to be involved in the overall metabolism of CAM at least in human liver microsomes.
Application of microtiter plate assay to evaluate inhibitory effects of various compounds on nine cytochrome P450 isoforms and to estimate their inhibition patterns.
Using a microtiter plate (MTP) assay consists of recombinant cytochromes P450 and fluorescent probes, we evaluated inhibitory effects of commercially available model-compounds, 18 typical substrates and 8 selective inhibitors, on nine cytochromes P450 (CYPs) activities.
The IC(50) values obtained from the assay were used to estimate inhibition constant (Ki) values, assuming competitive inhibition.
The Ki values calculated from IC(50) (the Ki(-cal) ) with the MTP assay using recombinant CYPs were compared with the Ki values (the Ki (-rep) ), reported for human liver microsomes (HLM).
Regarding all the inhibitory effects of the 26 test compounds on each CYP activity, a good correlation (r(2)=0.7306) was found between Ki(-cal) and Ki(-rep) .
The inhibitory patterns of some compounds on the five major CYP isoforms were estimated, using the MTP assay with the preincubation method.
Therefore, the MTP assay is a useful high throughput screening method to evaluate inhibitory effects of new drug candidates on 9 CYP isoforms in HLM.
In addition, the MTP assay with the preincubation method might be beneficial to estimate inhibitory patterns on CYP isoforms of new drug candidates and to estimate main CYP isoforms responsible for metabolism of these compounds.
Furafylline and erythromycin, both mechanism based inhibitors , strongly inhibited CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 activity, respectively and their inhibitory effects increased depending on the preincubation time.
In contrast, the inhibitory effects of phenacetin, diclofenac, S-mephenytoin, dextromethorphan, bufuralol and terfenadine, typical substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, respectively, on each recombinant CYP activity decreased after preincubation.
In vitro metabolism of carbofuran by human, mouse, and rat cytochrome P450 and interactions with chlorpyrifos , testosterone, and estradiol.
Carbofuran is a carbamate pesticide used in agricultural practice throughout the world.
Its effect as a pesticide is due to its ability to inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity.
Though carbofuran has a long history of use, there is little information available with respect to its metabolic fate and disposition in mammals.
The present study was designed to investigate the comparative in vitro metabolism of carbofuran from human, rat, and mouse liver microsomes (HLM, RLM, MLM, respectively), and characterize the specific enzymes involved in such metabolism, with particular reference to human metabolism.
Carbofuran is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) leading to the production of one major ring oxidation metabolite, 3-hydroxycarbofuran, and two minor metabolites.
The affinity of carbofuran for CYP enzymes involved in the oxidation to 3-hydroxycarbofuran is significantly less in HLM (Km=1.950 mM) than in RLM (Km=0.210 mM), or MLM (Km=0.550 mM).
Intrinsic clearance rate calculations indicate that HLM are 14-fold less efficient in the metabolism of carbofuran to 3-hydroxycarbofuran than RLM or MLM.
A screen of 15 major human CYP isoforms for metabolic ability with respect to carbofuran metabolism demonstrated that CYP3A4 is the major isoform responsible for carbofuran oxidation in humans.
CYP1A2 and 2C19 are much less active while other human CYP isoforms have minimal or no activity toward carbofuran.
In contrast with the human isoforms, members of the CYP2C family in rats are likely to have a primary role in carbofuran metabolism.
Normalization of HLM data with the average levels of each CYP in native HLM, indicates that carbofuran metabolism is primarily mediated by CYP3A4 (percent total normalized rate (% TNR)=77.5), although CYP1A2 and 2C19 play ancillary roles (% TNR=9.0 and 6.0, respectively).
This is substantiated by the fact that ketoconazole, a specific inhibitor of CYP3A4, is an excellent inhibitor of 3-hydroxycarbofuran formation in HLM (IC50: 0.31 microM).
Chlorpyrifos, an irreversible non-competitive inhibitor of CYP3A4, inhibits the formation of 3-hydroxycarbofuran in HLM (IC50: 39 microM).
The use of phenotyped HLM demonstrated that individuals with high levels of CYP3A4 have the greatest potential to metabolize carbofuran to its major metabolite.
The variation in carbofuran metabolism among 17 single-donor HLM samples is over 5-fold and the best correlation between CYP isoform activity and carbofuran metabolism was observed with CYP3A4 (r2=0.96).
The interaction of carbofuran and the endogenous CYP3A4 substrates, testosterone and estradiol, were also investigated.
Testosterone metabolism was activated by carbofuran in HLM and CYP3A4, however, less activation was observed for carbofuran metabolism by testosterone in HLM and CYP3A4.
No interactions between carbofuran and estradiol metabolism were observed.
()
Lansoprazole enantiomer activates human liver microsomal CYP2C9 catalytic activity in a stereospecific and substrate-specific manner.
We recently proposed a possible stereoselective activation by lansoprazole of CYP2C9-catalyzedtolbutamide hydroxylation, as well as stereoselective inhibition of several cytochrome P450 (P450) isoforms.
This study evaluated the effects of lansoprazole enantiomers on CYP2C9 activity in vitro, using several probe substrates.
R-Lansoprazole-mediated activation of the formation of 4-hydroxyphenytoin was also seen with recombinant human CYP2C9.
Kinetic parameters were also estimated using the two-site binding equation, with alpha values <1 and beta values >1, indicative of activation.
These substrate-dependent activation effects suggest that phenytoin has a different binding orientation compared with diclofenac and S-warfarin.
Overall, these results suggest that R-lansoprazole activates CYP2C9 in a stereospecific and substrate-specific manner, possibly by binding within the active site and inducing positive cooperativity.
This is the first report to describe stereoselective activation of this cytochrome P450 isoform.
For tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation and phenytoin 4-hydroxylation, R-lansoprazole was an activator (140 and 550% of control at 100 microM R-lansoprazole, EC50 values of 19.9 and 30.2 microM , respectively).
R-Lansoprazoleincreased the Michaelis-Menten-derived V(max) of phenytoin 4-hydroxylation from 0.024 to 0.121 pmol/min/pmol P450, and lowered its K(m) from 20.5 to 15.0 microM , suggesting that R-lansoprazoleactivatesCYP2C9-mediated phenytoin metabolism without displacing phenytoin from the active site.
Additionally, phenytoin at 10 to 200 microM had no reciprocal effect on the hydroxylation of R-lansoprazole.
Meanwhile, R-lansoprazole had no activation effect on diclofenac and S-warfarin metabolism in the incubation study using both recombinant CYP2C9 and human liver microsomes.
Mechanism-based inactivation of CYP3A by HIV protease inhibitors .
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protease inhibitors (PIs) are inhibitors of CYP3A enzymes, but the mechanism is poorly defined.
In this study, time- and concentration-dependent decreases in activity as defined by maximum rate of inactivation (k(inact)) and inhibitor concentration that gives 50% maximal inactivation(K(I)) of CYP3A by amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir were quantified using testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation as a marker for CYP3A activity with recombinant CYP3A4(+b(5)), recombinant CYP3A5, and pooled human liver microsomes (HLMs).
Spectrophototmetrically determined metabolic intermediate complex formation was observed for all of the PIs with CYP3A4(+b(5)), except for lopinavir and saquinavir.
The addition of nucleophilic and free aldehyde trapping agents and free iron and reactive oxygen species scavengers did not prevent inactivation of CYP3A4(+b(5)) by ritonavir, amprenavir, or nelfinavir, but glutathione decreased the inactivation by saquinavir (17%) and catalase decreased the inactivation by lopinavir (39%).
In conclusion, all the PIs exhibited mechanism-based inactivation, and predictions of the extent and time course of drug interactions with PIs could be underestimated if based solely on reversible inhibition.
All the PIs, except indinavir, displayed inactivation with CYP3A4(+b(5)) and HLMs.
Ritonavir was the most potent (K(I) = 0.10 and 0.17 microM ) and demonstrated high k(inact) values ( 0.32 and 0.40 min(-1)) with both CYP3A4(+b(5)) and HLMs.
Ritonavir was not significantly depleted by high-affinity binding with CYP3A4(+b(5)) and confirmed that estimation of reversible inhibition was confounded with irreversible inhibition.
For CYP3A5, nelfinavir exhibited the highest k(inact) (0.47 min(-1) ), but ritonavir was the most potent (K(I) = 0.12 microM ).
Saquinavir and indinavir did not show time- and concentration-dependent decreases in activity with CYP3A5.
Cyp2D6 catalyzes 5-hydroxylation of 1-(2-pyrimidinyl)-piperazine, an active metabolite of several psychoactive drugs, in human liver microsomes.
1-(2-Pyrimidinyl)-piperazine (1-PP) is an active metabolite of several psychoactive drugs including buspirone.
1-PP is also the major metabolite in the human circulation and in rat brains following oral administration of buspirone.
This study was conducted to identify the enzyme responsible for the metabolic conversion of 1-PP to 5-hydroxy-1-(2-pyrimidinyl) -piperazine (HO-1-PP) in human liver microsomes (HLMs).
The product HO-1-PP was quantified by a validated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method.
In the presence of NADPH, 1-PP (100 microM) was incubated separately with human cDNA-expressed cytochrome P450 isozymes (including CYP2D6, 3A4, 1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2E1, and 2B6) at 37 degrees C.
The formation of HO-1-PP followed a Michaelis-Menten kinetics with a K(m) of 171 microM and V(max) of 313 pmol/min x mg protein in HLMs.
Collectively, these results indicate that polymorphic CYP2D6 is responsible for the conversion of 1-PP to HO-1-PP.
CYP2D6catalyzed the formation of HO-1-PP from 1-PP .
This catalytic activity was >95% inhibited by quinidine, a CYP2D6 inhibitor.
HO-1-PP formation rates correlated well with the bufuralol 1-hydroxylase (CYP2D6) activities of individual HLMs.
Non-specific inhibition of human cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions by hemin.
Hemin, a stable form of heme, is known to have an antimutagenic effect.
Inhibitory effects of hemin on the cytochrome P450 (CYP)-catalyzed reactions of human liver microsomes and reconstituted systems containing purified CYP and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase (NPR) were seen.
Hemin non-specifically inhibited all of the microsomal CYP activities examined.
Spectrally detectable CYP was destroyed in human liver microsomes and in a reconstituted system in the presence of hemin and an NADPH-generating system.
We propose that the antimutagenic effect of hemin might be due to inhibition of CYP and NPR enzymes involved in the bioactivation of mutagens.
Hemin also inhibited 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation, 3- [2-(N,N-diethyl-N-methylammonium)ethyl]-7-methoxy-4-methylcoumarin O-demethylation, and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation catalyzed by purified CYPs 1A2, 2D6, and 3A4, with IC50 values of 27, 19, and 2.4 microM, respectively.
Hemin also inhibited reduction of cytochrome c and ferricyanide by NPR, as much as 47%.
Potential of pranlukast and zafirlukast in the inhibition of human liver cytochrome P450 enzymes.
1.
The potential of zafirlukast to inhibit several human cytochrome P450 enzymes is well known.
However, pranlukast, a structural analogue of zafirlukast, has not been studied.
Accordingly, the inhibitory potential of pranlukast was evaluated and compared with that of zafirlukast, a known CYP2C9 inhibitor , in in vitro microsomal incubation studies.
2.
3.
4.
Both pranlukast and zafirlukast showed moderate inhibition of CYP2C9-catalysed tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation, competitively inhibiting tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation with estimated mean K(i) values of 3.82 +/- 0.50 and 5.86 +/- 0.08 microM , respectively.
Pranlukast had no effect on CYP2C19- catalysed S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation or CYP3A4-catalysed midazolam 1-hydroxylation.
However, zafirlukast showed minorinhibition of these reactions.
Neither pranlukast nor zafirlukast inhibited CYP1A2-catalysed phenacetin O-deethylation, CYP2D6-catalysed dextromethorphan O-demethylation or CYP2E1-catalysed chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation.
The results suggest that like zafirlukast, pranlukast also has the potential moderately to inhibit CYP2C9-catalysed tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation.
Therefore, the inhibitory potential of pranlukast should be considered when it is co-administered with CYP2C9 substrates with narrow therapeutic ranges (e.g. S-warfarin, phenytoin).
CYP2B6, CYP3A4, and CYP2C19 are responsible for the in vitro N-demethylation of meperidine in human liver microsomes.
Meperidine is an opioid analgesic metabolized in the liver by N-demethylation to normeperidine , a potent stimulant of the central nervous system.
The purpose of this study was to identify the human cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes involved in normeperidine formation.
Our in vitro studies included 1) screening 16 expressed P450s for normeperidine formation, 2) kinetic experiments on human liver microsomes and candidate P450s, and 3) correlation and inhibition experiments using human hepatic microsomes.
After normalization by its relative abundance in human liver microsomes, CYP2B6, CYP3A4, and CYP2C19 accounted for 57, 28, and 15% of the total intrinsic clearance of meperidine.
CYP3A5 and CYP2D6 contributed to < 1%.
In contrast, antibodies inhibitory to CYP3A4 and CYP2C8/9/18/19 had little effect (<14% inhibition).
Formation of normeperidine significantlycorrelated with CYP2B6-selective S-mephenytoin N-demethylation (r = 0.88, p < 0.0001 at 75 > microMmeperidine, and r = 0.89, p < 0.0001 at 350 microMmeperidine, n = 21) and CYP3A4-selective midazolam 1'-hydroxylation (r = 0.59, p < 0.01 at 75 microMmeperidine, and r = 0.55, p < 0.01 at 350 microMmeperidine, n = 23).
No significantcorrelation was observed with CYP2C19-selective S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation (r = 0.36, p = 0.2 at 75 microMmeperidine, and r = 0.02, p = 0.9 at 350 microMmeperidine, n = 13).
An anti-CYP2B6 antibody inhibited normeperidine formation by 46%.
Experiments with thiotepa and ketoconazole suggested inhibition of microsomal CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 activity, whereas studies with fluvoxamine (a substrate of CYP2C19) were inconclusive due to lack of specificity.
We conclude that normeperidine formation in human liver microsomes is mainly catalyzed by CYP2B6 and CYP3A4, with a minor contribution from CYP2C19.
Comparison of inhibitory effects of the proton pump- inhibiting drugs omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, and rabeprazole on human cytochrome P450 activities.
The human clearance of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) of the substituted benzimidazole class is conducted primarily by the hepatic cytochrome P450 (P450) system.
To compare the potency and specificity of the currently used PPIs (i.e., omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, and rabeprazole) as inhibitors of four cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4), we performed in vitro studies using human liver microsomal preparations and recombinant CYP2C19.
Sample analysis was done using selected reaction monitoring liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectometry.
Our data suggest that, although the inhibitory profiles of the five studied PPIs were similar, lansoprazole and pantoprazole are the most potent in vitro inhibitors of CYP2C19 and CYP2C9, respectively.
Esomeprazole showed less inhibitory potency compared with omeprazole and its R-enantiomer.
The inhibitory potency of rabeprazole was relatively lower than the other PPIs, but its thioether analog showed potent inhibition on the P450 enzymes investigated, which may be clinically significant.
With several systems for CYP2C19 activity (two marker reactions, S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation and R-omeprazole 5-hydroxylation, tested in either human liver microsomes or recombinant CYP2C19), the five PPIs showed competitive inhibition of CYP2C19 activity with K(i) of 0.4 to 1.5 microM for lansoprazole, 2 to 6 microM for omeprazole, approximately 8 microM for esomeprazole, 14 to 69 microM for pantoprazole, and 17 to 21 microM for rabeprazole.
Pantoprazole was a competitive inhibitor of both CYP2C9-catalyzeddiclofenac 4'-hydroxylation and CYP3A4-catalyzedmidazolam 1'-hydroxylation (K(i) of 6 and 22 microM , respectively), which were at least 2 times more potent than the other PPIs.
All PPIs were poor inhibitors of CYP2D6-mediated bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation with IC(50) > 200 microM .
The inhibitory potency of a nonenzymatically formed product of rabeprazole, rabeprazole thioether, was also investigated and showed potent, competitive inhibition with K(i) values of 6 microM for CYP2C9, 2 to 8 microM for CYP2C19, 12 microM for CYP2D6, and 15 microM for CYP3A4.
The inhibitory potency of R-omeprazole on the four studied P450 enzymes was also studied and showed higher inhibitory potency than its S-isomer on CYP2C9 and 2C19 activities.
Differences in the induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 by taxane anticancer drugs, docetaxel and paclitaxel, assessed employing primary human hepatocytes.
The induction of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 by drugs and other xenobiotics is a common cause of serious drug interactions.
The aim of this study was to comparatively examine the effects of paclitaxel and docetaxel, two structurally related taxane anticancer agents, on the activity and expression of hepatic CYP3A4.
Employing primary cultures of human hepatocytes from multiple donors, we investigated the differences in the magnitude of CYP3A4induction and relative accumulation of paclitaxel and docetaxel.
The CYP3A4 activity of intact hepatocytes was measured as the rate of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation.
The CYP3A4-specific immunoreactive protein and mRNA levels were measured employing Western blot and Northern blot analysis, respectively.
Furthermore, employing cell-based reporter gene assay in CV-1 cells, we evaluated the capacity of paclitaxel and docetaxel to activate human pregnane X receptor (hPXR), an orphan nuclear receptor that plays a key role in the transcriptional regulation of CYP3A4.
A comparison of the cellular concentrations of paclitaxel and docetaxel, in the cell culture models employed for evaluating CYP3A4induction and hPXR activation, revealed that the intracellular paclitaxel levels were three-fold higher than that of docetaxel.
Thus, it appears that both pharmacokinetic (drug concentration) and pharmacodynamic differences (hPXR activation) may account for the observed differences in CYP3Ainduction by paclitaxel and docetaxel.
Our studies suggest that docetaxel has markedly reduced propensity to cause drug interactions that may entail hepatic CYP3A4induction.
In concurrence with previous reports, we observed that paclitaxel potently induced CYP3A4 activity and expression in hepatocytes treated for 48-96 h.
However, docetaxel did not increase the activity or the CYP3A4 immunoreactive protein levels for treatment periods up to 96 h. "
A marginal increase in the CYP3A4 mRNA levels was observed in cells treated with higher levels (5 and 10 microM) of docetaxel.
Furthermore, while paclitaxel effectively activated hPXR (the half-maximal effective concentration, EC50 , being about 5.2 microM), docetaxel weakly activated hPXR, and moreover the activation occurred only at high concentrations relative to paclitaxel.
Selective inhibition of CYP2B6-catalyzedbupropion hydroxylation in human liver microsomes in vitro.
Some inhibitory agents against CYP2B6 have been reported, but none of these has been extensively characterized or compared with others, as to the potency and selectivity of inhibition toward CYP2B6.
The goal of this work was to find a selective and potent chemical in vitro inhibitor toward CYP2B6 using bupropion hydroxylation as a model reaction.
At the initial screening of more than 30 substances, ticlopidine, triethylenethiophosphoramide (thioTEPA), metyrapone, xanthate C8, and benzylisothiocyanate displayed IC(50) values of <10 microM and were selected for a more detailed analysis.
Metyrapone, xanthate C8, and benzylisothiocyanate inhibited several other cytochrome P450 activities rather effectively, some of them even more potently than CYP2B6, and consequently are unsuitable as CYP2B6-selective probes.
Thus, although both compounds proved to be relatively potent inhibitors of CYP2B6, thioTEPA was about 2 orders of magnitude more selective than ticlopidine.
Thus, thioTEPA is a drug of choice when high CYP2B6 selectivity among major P450 enzymes is required.
Ticlopidine is a useful alternative under a controlled experimental setup and when higher potency is needed.
Ticlopidine and thioTEPA were the most potent inhibitors of bupropion hydroxylation with K(i) values of 0.2 and 2.8 microM , respectively.
The inhibition type of ticlopidine was found to be mixed type, with a component of mechanism-based inhibition, whereas thioTEPA inhibited CYP2B6 in a competitive manner.
In addition to CYP2B6, ticlopidine also inhibited both mephenytoin 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C19) (IC(50) , 2.7 microM ) and dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6) (IC(50) , 4.4 microM ).
For thioTEPA the next sensitive P450 activity after CYP2B6 was coumarin 7-hydroxylation ( IC(50), 256 microM).
Identification of human p450 isoforms involved in the metabolism of the antiallergic drug, oxatomide , and its inhibitory effect on enzyme activity.
Oxatomide is an antiallergic drug used for the treatment of diseases mediated by type I allergy.
Recently, it has been reported that terfenadine and astemizole, which have antiallergic actions similar to those of oxatomide, show side effects on the cardiovascular system, such as QT prolongation, ventricular arrhythmia and cardiac arrest.
This might be because concomitant drugs such as itraconazole inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), the enzyme responsible for degradation of terfenadine and astemizole, and thus the blood concentrations of the drugs are abnormally increased .
On the other hand, isoforms of P450 involved in the metabolism of oxatomide have not been clarified.
Therefore, we attempted to identify these isoforms using microsome preparations of in vitro expression systems derived from a human lymphoblastoid cell line.
Oxatomide was metabolized by CYP2D6-Val and CYP3A4, but not by CYP1A2, CYP2C9-Arg, CYP2C9-Cys or CYP2C19 .
We also examined whether oxatomide showed inhibitory effects on metabolic activity of individual P450 isozymes using model substrates for each isozyme.
Oxatomide did not inhibit the metabolism of the model substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2C9-Arg, CYP2C9-Cys and CYP2C19, but inhibited the degradation of those for CYP2D6-Val and CYP3A4 .
It was found that oxatomide is metabolized by CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in human liver microsomes, and simultaneously acts as an inhibitor for these isoforms, responsible for the metabolism of the drug itself.
Interaction of dexloxiglumide , a cholecystokinin type-1 receptor antagonist, with human cytochromes P450.
Dexloxiglumide (DEX) is a cholecystokinin type-1 receptor antagonist under development for the treatment of constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome.
Studies of the potential interaction of DEX with human cytochromes P450 (CYPs) were conducted in vitro.
DEX (300 micro M) , both with and without a 15-min pre-incubation, was incubated with pooled human liver microsomes and substrates selective for each of eight CYPs.
Mean K(i) (SD) for CYP2C9/10 and CYP2E1 were 69.0 (24.3) and 426 (60) microM , respectively.
Incubations of [(14)C]DEX with pooled human liver microsomes produced one major phase I metabolic fraction, with V(max) =131 pmol/min/mg protein and K(m) = 23.7 microM .
Further incubations with (i) liver microsomes from 16 individual donors (correlation analysis), (ii) Supersomes trade mark and (iii) selective chemical inhibitors , implicated CYP3A4/5, CYP2B6 and CYP2C9 in the formation of this component.
However, based on the maximum concentration (27 microM ) after repeated oral doses of 200 mg t.i.d. and the unbound fraction (0.03) of DEX in human plasma, no clinically relevant metabolic interactions with other CYP substrates are predicted.
This resulted in >30% inhibition of tolbutamide 4-methyl-hydroxylase (CYP2C9/10) and lauric acid 11-hydroxylase (CYP2E1) activities.
Thus, DEX interacts with CYP2C9 both as inhibitor (K(i) = 69.0 microM ) and as substrate in vitro.
Effect of nilvadipine , a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on cytochrome P450 activities in human hepatic microsomes.
The effects of nilvadipine , a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist, on cytochrome P450 (CYP) activities in human hepatic microsomes were investigated.
The free fractions of nilvadipine in the incubation mixture estimated by ultracentrifugation were 18.9-27.4%.
These results suggest that nilvadipine would not cause clinically significant interactions with other drugs, which are metabolized by CYPs, via the inhibition of metabolism .
Nilvadipine competitively inhibited CYP1A2-mediated 7- ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase, CYP2A6-mediated coumarin 7-hydroxylase, CYP2C8/9-mediated tolbutamide methylhydroxylase, CYP2C19-mediated S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase, and CYP3A4-mediated nifedipine oxidase activities, and the inhibition constant (Ki) values were 13.0, 35.8, 5.02, 24.5 and 44.3 microM , respectively.
On the other hand, no inhibition of CYP2B6-mediated 7-benzyloxyresorufin O-debenzylation, CYP2D6-mediated bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, or CYP2E1-mediated chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation by nilvadipine at 40 microM concentration was observed.
Regulation of CYP2B6 in primary human hepatocytes by prototypical inducers.
The objectives of this study were to evaluate the ability of 14 compounds, which differentially activate human pregnane X receptor (hPXR), to induce CYP2B6 expression and to compare CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 concentration- and time-dependent induction by select inducers.
Three primary human hepatocyte preparations were treated daily for 3 days with three concentrations of all compounds.
Additional concentration- and/or time-response studies were conducted with clotrimazole, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and rifampin in six preparations.
CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 protein and activities were assessed by Western blotting, bupropion hydroxylation, and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation, respectively.
To evaluate hPXR activation by the 14 compounds, reporter gene assays were conducted using Huh7 cells cotransfected with hPXR and a CYP2B6 (NR1)5-LUC reporter plasmid.
EC50 values for CYP2B6 and CYP3A4induction by clotrimazole, phenobarbital, phenytoin, and rifampin were strongly correlated (r2 = 0.99) and were statistically indistinguishable for clotrimazole, phenytoin, and rifampin.
Kinetic constants governing time-dependent induction by phenobarbital and rifampin were also similar between CYP2B6 and CYP3A4.
These results indicate that CYP2B6 is highly inducible by known CYP3A4 inducers and suggest that hPXR is a major determinant of CYP2B6-inducible expression for many, but not all, compounds evaluated in this study.
Clotrimazole, phenobarbital, rifampin, and ritonavir strongly induced CYP2B6 and activated hPXR; dexamethasone t-butylacetate and sulfinpyrazone induced CYP2B6 weakly and activated hPXR moderately;paclitaxel strongly activated hPXR but did not increaseCYP2B6 expression carbamazepine and phenytoinmoderately or strongly increased CYP2B6 expression but weakly activated hPXR; and dexamethasone, methotrexate, probenecid, sulfadimidine , and troleandomycin demonstrated weak or negligible effects on CYP2B6 and hPXR.
The olivacine derivative s 16020 (9-hydroxy-5,6-dimethyl-N- [2-(dimethylamino)ethyl)-6H-pyrido(4,3-B)-carbazole-1-carboxamide)inducesCYP1A and its own metabolism in human hepatocytes in primary culture.
The olivacine derivative 9-hydroxy-5,6-dimethyl-N- [2-(dimethylamino)ethyl)-6H-pyrido(4,3-b)-carbazole-1-carboxamide (S 16020) exhibits a potent antitumor activity.
However, when administered in cancer patients, its blood clearance increases after repeated administrations, whereas the volume of distribution remains constant, suggesting that the drug is able toinduce its own metabolism .
The aim of this work was to identify the enzymes involved in S 16020 metabolism and determine whether this molecule is an enzyme inducer in human hepatocytes in primary cultures.
Among a battery of cDNA-expressed cytochromes P450 (P450s) and flavin monooxygenase (FMO), only CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and FMO3 were able to generate detectable amounts of metabolites of S 16020 .
In primary hepatocytes, pretreatment of cells with S 16020 or TCDD produced a significant and similar increase of S 16020 metabolism , consistent with the previous indications on the role of CYP1As.
We conclude that CYP1As and FMO3 are the major phase I enzymes involved in the metabolism of S 16020 and that this molecule is a potent hydrocarbon-like inducer able to stimulate its own metabolism in primary human hepatocytes and liver.
In primary hepatocytes, S 16020 behaved as a CYP1A inducer , producing an increase in CYP1A2 protein, acetanilide 4-hydroxylation, ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation, and chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation to an extent similar to that of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), a prototypical CYP1A inducer.
The levels of other P450 proteins, including CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4, and related activities were not affected by S 16020 .
Dose-dependent induction of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 and activation of pregnane X receptor by topiramate.
In clinical studies, topiramate (TPM) was shown to cause a dose-dependent increase in the clearance of ethinyl estradiol.
We hypothesized that this interaction results from induction of hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 by TPM.
Accordingly, we investigated whether TPM induces CYP3A4 in primary human hepatocytes and activates the human pregnane X receptor (hPXR), a nuclear receptor that serves as a regulator of CYP3A4 transcription.
Human hepatocytes were treated for 72 h with TPM (10, 25, 50, 100, 250, and 500 microM) and known inducers , phenobarbital (PB; 2 mM), and rifampicin (10 microM).
The rate of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation by hepatocytes served as a marker for CYP3A4 activity.
The CYP3A4-specific protein and mRNA levels were determined by using Western and Northern blot analyses, respectively.
The hPXR activation was assessed with cell-based reporter gene assay.
It also is suggestive of other potential interactions when high-dose TPM therapy is used.
Compared with controls, TPM (50-500 microM)-treated hepatocytes exhibited a considerable increase in the CYP3A4 activity (1.6- to 8.2-fold), protein levels (4.6- to 17.3-fold), and mRNA levels (1.9- to 13.3-fold).
Comparatively, rifampicin (10 microM) effected 14.5-, 25.3-, and a 20.3-fold increase in CYP3A4 activity, immunoreactive protein levels, and mRNA levels, respectively.
TPM (50-500 microM) caused 1.3- to 3-foldactivation of the hPXR, whereas rifampicin (10 microM) caused a 6-foldactivation.
The observed induction of CYP3A4 by TPM , especially at the higher concentrations, provides a potential mechanistic explanation of the reported increase in the ethinyl estradiol clearance by TPM.
Human cytochrome p450 inhibition and metabolic-intermediate complex formation by goldenseal extract and its methylenedioxyphenyl components.
The concurrent use of herbal medicinals with prescription and over-the-counter drugs carries a risk for unanticipated adverse drug-botanical pharmacokinetic interactions, particularly as a result of cytochrome P450 (P450) inhibition.
Extracts of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) containing approximately equal concentrations ( approximately 17 mM) of two methylenedioxyphenyl alkaloids, berberine and hydrastine, inhibited with increasing potency (CYP2C9) diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation, (CYP2D6) bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation, and (CYP3A4) testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activities in human hepatic microsomes.
The inhibition of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activity was noncompetitive with an apparent Ki of 0.11% extract.
Of the methylenedioxyphenyl alkaloids, berberine (IC50 = 45 microM) was the more inhibitory toward bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation and hydrastine (IC50 approximately 350 microM for both isomers), toward diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation.
For testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation, berberine was the least inhibitory component (IC50 approximately 400 microM).
Hydrastine inhibited testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation with IC50 values for the (+)- and (-)-isomers of 25 and 30 microM, respectively.
For (-)-hydrastine, an apparent Ki value of 18 microM without preincubation and an NADPH-dependent mechanism-based inhibition with a kinactivation of 0.23 min(-1) and a KI of approximately 110 microM were determined.
Cytochrome P450 metabolic-intermediate (MI) complex formation could be demonstrated for both hydrastine isomers.
With expressed P450 isoforms, hydrastine formed a P450 MI complex with CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4.
Coexpression of cytochrome b5 with the P450 isoforms enhanced the rate but not the extent of P450 MI complex formation.
()
Mechanism-based inhibition of human liver microsomal cytochrome P450 1A2 by zileuton, a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor .
Zileuton, a 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor , was evaluated as an inhibitor of cytochrome P450 activity in human liver microsomes.
The effect was NADPH-, time-, and concentration-dependent, and was characterized by a kinact (maximal rate of enzyme inactivation) and apparent KI (inhibitor concentration that supports half the maximal rate of inactivation) of 0.035 min(-1) and 117 microM , respectively (kinact/KIratio of 0.0003 min-1 microM(-1)).
In addition, the inhibition of CYP1A2 was not reversed in the presence of reduced glutathione, catalase, and superoxide dismutase and was refractory to dialysis.
In the absence of preincubation, the racemate was found to be a weak inhibitor ( IC50> 100 microM) of phenacetin O-deethylation (POD) (CYP1A2), paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylation (CYP2C8), diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9), (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C19), bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation (CYP2D6), testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A4), chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1), and bupropion hydroxylation (CYP2B6).
When preincubated with NADPH-fortified human liver microsomes in the absence of substrate, zileuton (racemate) was shown to inhibit POD.
Preincubation-dependent inhibition of POD activity was also observed with the individual (S)-(-)- and (R)-(+)-enantiomers of zileuton [(S)-(-)-zileuton ; kinact , 0.037 min(-1) , KI , 98.2 microM , kinact/KIratio , 0.0004 min(-1) microM(-1) ; (R)-(+)-zileuton; kinact , 0.012 min(-1), KI , 66.6 microM , kinact/KIratio, 0.0002 min(-1) microM(-1)].
Therefore, zileuton was characterized as a mechanism-based inhibitor of human liver microsomal CYP1A2.
Mechanism-based inhibition of CYP1A2may explain why zileuton decreases the oral clearance of antipyrine, propranolol, (R)-warfarin, and theophylline, at doses that have a minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of (S)-warfarin, phenytoin, and terfenadine.
Identification of cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of 4'-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MOPPP) , a designer drug, in human liver microsomes.
1.
The metabolism of 4'-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MOPPP) , a novel designer drug, to its demethylated major metabolite 4'-hydroxy-pyrrolidinopropio-phenone (HO-PPP) was studied in pooled human liver microsomes (HLM) and in cDNA-expressed human hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes.
2.
CYP2C19 catalysed the demethylation with apparent Km and Vmax values of 373.4 +/- 45.1 microM and 6.0 +/- 0.3 pmol min(-1) pmol(-1) CYP, respectively (mean +/- SD).
Both CYP2D6 and HLM exhibited clear biphasic profiles with apparent K(m,1) values of 1.3 +/- 0.4 and 22.0 +/- 6.5 microM , respectively, and V(max,1) values of 1.1 +/- 0.1 pmol min(-1) pmol(-1) CYP and 169.1 +/- 20.5 pmol min(-1) mg(-1) protein, respectively.
3.
Percentages of intrinsic clearances of MOPPP by particular CYPs were calculated using the relative activity factor (RAF) approach with (S)-mephenytoin-4'-hydroxylation or bufuralol -1'-hydroxylation as index reactions for CYP2C19 or CYP2D6, respectively.
4.
MOPPP, HO-PPP and the standard 3',4'-methylenedioxy-pyrrolidinopropio-phenone (MDPPP) were separated and analysed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in the selected-ion monitoring (SIM) mode.
5.
6.
It can be concluded from the data obtained from kinetic and inhibition studies that polymorphically expressed CYP2D6 is the enzyme mainly responsible for MOPPP demethylation.
The CYP2D6 specific chemical inhibitor quinidine (3 microM) significantly (p<0.0001) inhibited HO-PPP formation by 91.8 +/- 0.5% (mean +/- SEM) in incubation mixtures with HLM and 2 microM MOPPP.
Cytochrome P450 2C8 and CYP3A4/5 are involved in chloroquine metabolism in human liver microsomes.
Chloroquine has been used for many decades in the prophylaxis and treatment of malaria.
It is metabolized in humans through the N-dealkylation pathway, to desethylchloroquine (DCQ) and bisdesethylchloroquine (BDCQ), by cytochrome P450 (CYP).
However, until recently, no data are available on the metabolic pathway of chloroquine.
Therefore, the metabolic pathway of chloroquine was evaluated using human liver microsomes and cDNA-expressed CYPs.
Chloroquine is mainly metabolized to DCQ , and its Eadie-Hofstee plots were biphasic, indicating the involvement of multiple enzymes, with apparent Km and Vmax values of 0.21 mM and 1.02 nmol/min/mg protein 3.43 mM and 10.47 nmol/min/mg protein for high and low affinity components, respectively.
Of the cDNA-expressing CYPs examined, CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4/5 exhibited significant DCQ formation.
In conclusion, the results of the present study demonstrated that CYP2C8 and CYP3A4/5 are the major enzymes responsible for the chloroquine N-deethylation to DCQ in human liver microsomes.
A study using chemical inhibitors showed only quercetin (a CYP2C8 inhibitor ) and ketoconazole (a CYP3A4/5 inhibitor ) inhibited the DCQ formation.
In addition, the DCQ formation significantlycorrelated with the CYP3A4/5-catalyzedmidazolam 1-hydroxylation (r = 0.868) and CYP2C8-catalyzedpaclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylation (r = 0.900).
A screening study on the liability of eight different female sex steroids to inhibit CYP2C9, 2C19 and 3A4 activities in human liver microsomes.
The aim of this study was to screen the inhibitory potential of different clinically used oestrogen and progestin hormones on CYP2C9, 2C19 and 3A4 activities in human liver microsomes.
The degree of inhibition by desogestrel, 3-ketodesogestrel , 17-beta-oestradiol , gestodene , aethinyloestradiol , medroxyprogesterone acetate, norethisterone or L-norgestrel were studied at 100 microM on losartanoxidation (CYP2C9), R-omeprazole 5'-hydroxylation (CYP2C19) and R-omeprazole sulphoxidation (CYP3A4) with a 10-min preincubation with NADPH in human liver microsomes prepared from 6 individual genotyped donor livers.
In conclusion, the liability of clinically used female sex steroids to inhibit CYP2C9, 2C19 and 3A4 activities in human liver microsomes is very distinctive and these differences among both the oestrogen and progestin hormones may, at least in part, explain the variable results from clinical trials examining inhibitory effects of hormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptives on drug metabolism .
Aethinyloestradiol was found to be a potent inhibitor (55% mean inhibition ; 95% CI 32% to 79%) of losartanoxidation (CYP2C9) and R-omeprazole 5-hydroxylation (70%; 63% to 77%) (CYP2C19),while it had little effect on R-omeprazole sulphoxidation (CYP3A4) activity.
17-beta-Oestradiol did not produce significant inhibition on any of the studied enzyme activities.
Of the progestin hormones studied, gestodene and 3-ketodesogestrel were potent inhibitors of CYP2C19 (57%; 47% to 67% and 51%; 29% to 45%) and CYP3A4 (45%; 30% to 59% and 40%; 19% to 62%),but had little effect on the CYP2C9 activity.
In addition, medroxyprogesterone acetate was found to inhibit CYP2C9 (55%; 45% to 65%),while not having significant effect on 2C19 or 3A4 .
Identification of CYP1A2 as the main isoform for the phase I hydroxylated metabolism of genistein and a prodrug converting enzyme of methylated isoflavones.
This study determined the cytochrome P450 (P450) isoforms responsible for metabolism of isoflavones using human liver microsomes (HLM) and expressed P450s.
The primary metabolite of genistein is 3'-OH-genistein, as identified with an authentic chemically synthesized standard.
The contribution of these P450s to the formation of 3'-OH-genistein was also confirmed with a panel of expressed enzymes.
The conversion of biochanin A to genistein appears to be mainly mediated by CYP1A2 because of the strong correlation between the conversion rates and CYP1A2 activities in HLM.
Thus, CYP1A2 is an effective prodrug-converting enzyme for less active methylated isoflavones.
In conclusion, CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 metabolized genistein and CYP1A2 acted as prodrug-converting enzymes for other less active methylated isoflavones.
CYP1A2 was predominantly responsible for 3'-OH-genistein formation since its formation was inhibited (>50%, p < 0.05) by a monoclonal antibody specific for CYP1A2, was correlated with CYP1A2 activities of HLM, and was catalyzed by expressed CYP1A2.
In addition to CYP1A2, CYP2E1 also catalyzed, although to a lesser extent, its formation.
Methylated isoflavones biochanin A, prunetin, and formononetin (10-100 microM) were rapidly converted by HLM and expressed CYP1A2 to more active genistein and daidzein.
CYP1A2-catalyzed conversion of biochanin A to genistein (Km, 7.80 microM; Vmax, 903 pmol/min/mg of protein; Vmax/Km, 116 microl/min/mg of protein) was much faster than 3'-hydroxylation of genistein (Km, 12.7 microM and Vmax, 109 pmol/min/mg of protein; Vmax/Km, 8.6 microl/min/mg of protein).
The interaction studies showed that genistein inhibited formation of acetaminophen from phenacetin with an IC50 value of 16 microM.
Additional studies showed that phenacetin and genistein were mutually inhibitory.
Eletriptan metabolism by human hepatic CYP450 enzymes and transport by human P-glycoprotein.
\"Reaction phenotyping\" studies were performed with eletriptan (ETT) to determine its propensity to interact with coadministered medications.
Its ability to serve as a substrate for human P-glycoprotein (P-gp) was also investigated since a central mechanism of action has been proposed for this \"triptan\" class of drug.
DETT was selected to be monitored in our studies since it represents a significant ETT metabolite in humans, circulating at concentrations 10 to 20% of those observed for parent drug.
ETT was metabolized to DETT by recombinant CYP2D6 (rCYP2D6) and rCYP3A4, and to a lesser extent by rCYP2C9 and rCYP2C19.
ETT was determined to be a good substrate for human P-gp in vitro.
In bidirectional transport studies across LLC-MDR1 and LLC-Mdr1a cell monolayers, ETT had a BA/AB transport ratio in the range 9 to 11.
This finding had significance in vivo since brain exposure to ETT was reduced 40-fold in Mdr1a+/+ relative to Mdr1a-/- mice.
In studies with a characterized bank of human liver microsome preparations, a good correlation (r2 = 0.932) was obtained between formation of N-desmethyl eletriptan (DETT) and CYP3A4-catalyzedtestosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation.
The metabolism of ETT to DETT in human liver microsomes was markedly inhibited by troleandomycin, erythromycin, miconazole, and an inhibitory antibody to CYP3A4 ,but not by inhibitors of other major P450 enzymes.
ETT had little inhibitory effect on any of the P450 enzymes investigated. "
ETT metabolism to DETT is therefore catalyzed primarily by CYP3A4, and plasma concentrations are expected to be increased when coadministered with inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp activity.
Avasimibe induces CYP3A4 and multiple drug resistance protein 1 gene expression through activation of the pregnane X receptor.
In vitro and clinical studies were conducted to characterize the potential of avasimibe , an acyl-CoA/cholesterol acyltransferase inhibitor to cause drug-drug interactions.
Clinically, 3- and 6-fold increases in midazolam (CYP3A4 substrate ) oral clearance were observed after 50 and 750 mg of avasimibe daily for 7 days, respectively.
A 40%decrease in digoxin (P-glycoprotein substrate ) area under the curve was observed with 750 mg of avasimibe daily for 10 days.
In vitro studies were conducted to define the mechanisms of these interactions.
Drug-drug interaction studies for CYP3A4 using pooled human hepatic microsomes and avasimibe at various concentrations, revealed IC50 values of 20.7 , 1.6 , and 3.1 microM using testosterone, midazolam, and felodipine as probe substrates , respectively.
Our results indicate that avasimibe causes clinically significant drug-drug interactions through direct activation of hPXR and the subsequent induction of its target genes CYP3A4 and multiple drug resistance protein 1.
Induction was observed in CYP3A4 activity and immunoreactive protein ( EC50 of 200-400 nM ) in primary human hepatocytes treated with avasimibe .
Rifampin treatment yielded similar results.
Microarray analysis revealed avasimibe (1 microM) increased CYP3A4 mRNA 20-fold, compared with a 23-fold increase with 50 microMrifampin.
Avasimibe induced P-glycoprotein mRNA by about 2-fold and immunoreactive protein in a dose-dependent manner.
Transient transfection assays showed that avasimibe is a potent activator of the human pregnane X receptor (hPXR) and more active than rifampin on an equimolar basis.
Identification of the cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in the N-oxidation of voriconazole.
Voriconazole is a triazole antifungal agent with potent activity against a broad spectrum of clinically significant pathogens.
In vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that voriconazole is extensively metabolized , with the major circulating metabolite resulting from N-oxidation.
In the present study, we report on the human cytochrome P450 enzymes responsible for the generation of this metabolite.
In human liver microsomes voriconazole N-oxidation exhibited biphasic kinetics with K(m1) of 8.1 microM , and K(m2) of 835 microM .
Incubations with recombinant enzymes suggested both CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 as high-affinity enzymes ( K(m) values of 20 and 3.5 microM , respectively).
Further studies used chemical inhibitors in human liver microsomes prepared from individual donors, including two CYP2C19 poor metabolizers.
These data indicate that voriconazole is a substrate for CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4, with CYP2C9 involvement being minimal in human liver microsomes.
Genotype status for CYP2C19 and/or coadministration of drugs that modulate CYP2C19 or CYP3A4 activities could effect voriconazole plasma levels.
Studies at 2500 microMvoriconazole identified CYP3A4 as the low-affinity component, with activity correlating strongly with CYP3A4 activity in a bank of human liver microsomes (r = 0.90) and inhibited by ketoconazole.
At 25 microM, voriconazole N-oxidation showed strong correlation with CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 activity (r = 0.77 and 0.74, respectively) and was inhibited by both sulfaphenazole and ketoconazole.
No inhibition was observed with sulfaphenazole , indicating a minor role for CYP2C9 in human liver , but inhibition by ketoconazole was most potent in the CYP2C19 poor metabolizer livers, suggesting an increased role for CYP3A4 in individuals lacking CYP2C19.
Inhibition and activation of the human liver microsomal and human cytochrome P450 3A4 metabolism of testosterone by deployment-related chemicals.
Cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes are major catalysts involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics and endogenous substrates such as testosterone (TST).
Major TST metabolites formed by human liver microsomes include 6beta-hydroxytestosterone (6beta-OHTST), 2beta-hydroxytestosterone (2beta-OHTST) , and 15beta-hydroxytestosterone (15beta-OHTST) .
A screen of 16 cDNA-expressed human P450 isoforms demonstrated that 94% of all TST metabolites are produced by members of the CYP3A subfamily with 6beta-OHTST accounting for 86% of all TST metabolites.
Similar K(m) values were observed for production of 6beta-, 2beta-, and 15beta-OHTST with human liver microsomes (HLM) and CYP3A4.
However, V(max) and CL(int) were significantly higher for 6beta-OHTST than 2beta-OHTST (approximately 18-fold ) and 15beta-OHTST (approximately 40-fold ).
Preincubation of HLM with a variety of ligands, including chemicals used in military deployments, resulted in varying levels of inhibition or activation of TST metabolism .
The greatest inhibition of TST metabolism in HLM was following preincubation with organophosphorus compounds, including chlorpyrifos , phorate , and fonofos , with up to 80% inhibition noticed for several metabolites including 6beta-OHTST .
Preincubation of CYP3A4 with chlorpyrifos , but not chlorpyrifos-oxon , resulted in 98% inhibition of TST metabolism .
Phorate and fonofos also inhibited the production of most primary metabolites of CYP3A4.
Kinetic analysis indicated that chlorpyrifos was one of the most potent inhibitors of major TST metabolites followed by fonofos and phorate.
Chlorpyrifos ,fonofos, and phorate inhibited major TST metabolites noncompetitively and irreversibly.
Conversely, preincubation of CYP3A4 with pyridostigmine bromide increased metabolite levels of 6beta-OHTST and 2beta-OHTST .
Preincubation of human aromatase (CYP19) with the test chemicals had no effect on the production of the endogenous estrogen, 17beta-estradiol.
Oxidative metabolism of amprenavir in the human liver. Effect of the CYP3A maturation.
Amprenavir is a human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) protease inhibitor intended to be used to treat HIV-infected children.
Although a pediatric dosage is proposed by the manufacturer, no data are currently available on the pharmacokinetics of amprenavir in neonates and infants.
Amprenavir being primarily eliminated after oxidative biotransformation, we explored its in vitro metabolism by cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent monooxygenases.
In our conditions, five metabolites were formed in vitro and subsequently analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; P450-dependent oxidations occurred either on the tetrahydrofuran ring (M3 and M4), the aniline ring (M5), and the aliphatic chain (M2) or resulted from the N-dealkylation and loss of the tetrahydrofuran ring (M1).
The two major metabolites, respectively M3 and M2 were formed by human liver microsomes with K(m) between 10 and 70 microM .
CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent CYP3A5 were major contributors for the formation of M2, M3, and M5 metabolites,whereas CYP3A7 had no or little activity. "
The metabolism of amprenavir was negligible in microsomes from either fetuses or neonates and steadily increased after the first weeks of life in relation with the maturation of CYP3A4/5.
In conclusion, results demonstrated that the capacity of the human liver to oxidize amprenavir is low during the first weeks after birth and that dosage could be substantially reduced during the early neonatal period.
This assumption was confirmed by inhibition with ketoconazole and ritonavir (two potent inhibitors of CYP3A) whereas sulfaphenazole (2C9 inhibitor ) and quinidine (2D6 inhibitor ) were inefficient.
Effects of olopatadine, a new antiallergic agent, on human liver microsomal cytochrome P450 activities.
Olopatadine, a new histamine H(1) receptor-selective antagonist, is a tricyclic drug containing an alkylamino moiety.
Some compounds containing a similar alkylamino group form a cytochrome p450 (p450) -iron (II)-nitrosoalkane metabolite complex [metabolic intermediate complex (MIC)], thereby causing quasi-irreversible inhibition of the p450.
There was concern that olopatadine might also form MICs, therefore, the present investigation was undertaken to explore this possibility.
We identified the enzymes catalyzing olopatadine metabolism and investigated the effect of olopatadine on human p450 activities.
During incubation with human liver microsomes in the presence of a NADPH-generating system, olopatadine was metabolized to two metabolites, M1 (N-monodemethylolopatadine) and M3 (olopatadine N-oxide) at rates of 0.330 and 2.50 pmol/min/mg protein, respectively.
High specific activity of M3 formation was exhibited by cDNA-expressed flavin-containing monooxygenase (FMO)1 and FMO3.
Olopatadine did not inhibit p450 activities when it was simultaneously incubated with substrates for different p450 isozymes.
Also, p450 activities in human liver microsomes were unaffected by pretreatment with olopatadine or M1.
Furthermore, spectral analysis revealed that neither olopatadine nor M1 formed an MIC.
Therefore, it is unlikely that olopatadine will cause drug-drug interactions involving p450 isozymes.
Troleandomycin and ketoconazole, which are both selective inhibitors of CYP3A, significantly reduced M1 formation but specific inhibitors of other p450 isozymes did not decrease M1 formation.
Incubation of olopatadine with cDNA-expressed human p450 isozymes confirmed that M1 formation was almost exclusively catalyzed by CYP3A4.
The formation of M3 was enhanced by N-octylamine and was inhibited by thiourea .
Pathways of carbamazepine bioactivation in vitro I. Characterization of human cytochromes P450 responsible for the formation of 2- and 3-hydroxylated metabolites.
In vitro studies were conducted to identify the cytochromes P450 (P450s) involved in the formation of 2- and 3-hydroxycarbamazepine , metabolites that may serve as precursors in the formation of protein-reactive metabolites.
Human liver microsomes (HLMs) converted carbamazepine (30-300 microM) to 3-hydroxycarbamazepine at rates >25 times those of 2-hydroxycarbamazepine.
Both the 2- and 3-hydroxylation of carbamazepine appeared to conform to monophasic Michaelis-Menten kinetics in HLMs (apparent K(m) values, approximately 1640 and approximately 217 microM ; apparent V(max) values, approximately 5.71 and approximately 46.9 pmol/mg of protein/min, respectively).
Formation of 2- and 3-hydroxycarbamazepine did not correlate significantly with any other P450 activities.
These results suggest that CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 are largely responsible for the formation of 3-hyrdoxycarbamazepine, whereas multiple P450s (CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2E1, and 3A4) contributed to 2-hydroxycarbamazepine formation.
Rates of carbamazepine 2- and 3-hydroxylation correlated strongly with CYP2B6 activity (r >or= 0.757) in a panel of HLMs (n = 8).
Carbamazepine3-hydroxylation also correlatedsignificantly with CYP2C8 activity at a carbamazepine concentration of 30 microM.
The chemical inhibitors ketoconazole (CYP3A) and 7-EFC (CYP2B6) inhibited both 2- and 3-hydroxycarbamazepine formation whereas 4-methylpyrazole (CYP2E1) markedly decreased 2-hydroxycarbamazepine formation .
Several recombinant P450s catalyzedcarbamazepine 2- and 3-hydroxylation, but after adjustment for relative hepatic abundance, CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 appeared to be the major catalysts of carbamazepine 3-hydroxylase activity, and at least five P450s were significant contributors to 2-hydroxycarbamazepine formation; CYP2E1 made the greatest contribution to the Cl(int) of carbamazepine 2-hydroxylation (approximately 30%), but P450s CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, and 3A4 also made significant contributions (approximately 13-18%).
Inhibition of cytochrome P450 2E1 by propofol in human and porcine liver microsomes.
While almost anesthetics are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, some major volatile ones such as halothane and sevoflurane are metabolized by CYP2E1 in humans.
Basal human enzyme activities were characterized by a V(max) of 1426+/-230 and 288+/-29 pmol min(-1)mg(-1) protein and a K(m) of 122+/-47 and 149+/-42 microM , while the corresponding porcine activities were associated with a V(max) of 352+/-42 pmol min(-1)mg(-1) protein and a K(m) of 167+/-38 microM .
These in vitro results suggest that propofol could have a protective effect on toxic metabolite activation of compounds catalyzed by CYP2E1.
To determine whether 2,6-diisopropylphenol (propofol), a widely used intravenous anesthetic agent, known to inhibit CYP3A4 and CYP1A2, also inhibits CYP2E1, 6-OH hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone, a prototypical CYP2E1 substrate, was estimated using two pools of human microsomes and one pool of porcine microsomes from seven livers.
A competitive inhibition of CYP2E1 by propofol was observed with low inhibition constants in the therapeutic range in both porcine (19 microM) and human (48 microM) liver microsomes.
Inhibitory effects of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) on human cytochrome P450 enzymes in vitro: mechanism of drug interaction between TCAs and phenytoin.
The ability of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) to inhibit phenytoin p-hydroxylation was evaluated in vitro by incubation studies of human liver microsomes and cDNA-expressed cytochrome p450s (p450s).
The TCAs tested were amitriptyline, imipramine, nortriptyline, and desipramine.
None of the TCAs tested produced remarkable inhibition of any other p450 isoforms.
Amitriptyline and imipramine strongly and competitively inhibited phenytoin p-hydroxylation in microsomal incubations (estimated K(i) values of 5.2 and 15.5 micro M, respectively).
In contrast, nortriptyline and desipramine produced only weak inhibition.
In the incubation study using cDNA-expressed P450s, both CYP2C9 and CYP2C19catalyzedphenytoin p-hydroxylation, whereas TCAs inhibited only the CYP2C19 pathway.
All of the TCAs tested inhibitedCYP2D6-catalyzeddextromethorphan-O-demethylation competitively, with estimated K(i) values of 31.0 , 28.6 , 7.9 , and 12.5 micro M , respectively.
The tertiary amine TCAs, amitriptyline and imipramine, also inhibited CYP2C19-catalyzed S-mephenytoin 4'- hydroxylation (estimated K(i) of 37.7 and 56.8 micro M , respectively).
The secondary amine TCAs, nortriptyline and desipramine, however, showed minimal inhibition of CYP2C19 (estimated IC(50) of 600 and 685 micro M , respectively).
These results suggest that TCAs inhibit both CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 and that the interaction between TCAs and phenytoin involves inhibition of CYP2C19-catalyzedphenytoin p-hydroxylation.
The interactions of a selective protein kinase C beta inhibitor with the human cytochromes P450.
Studies were performed to determine the cytochromes P450 (P450) responsible for the biotransformation of (S)-13 [(dimethylamino)methyl]-10,11,14,15-tetrahydro-4,9:16,21-dimetheno-1H , 13H-dibenzo [e,k]pyrrolo [3,4-h] [1,4,13]oxadiazacyclohexadecene-1,3(2H)-dione (LY333531) to its equipotent metabolite, N-desmethyl LY333531 , and to examine the ability of these two compounds to inhibit P450-mediated metabolism.
Kinetic studies indicated that a single enzyme in human liver microsomes was able to form N-desmethyl LY333531 with an apparent K(M) value of approximately 1 microM.
The formation rate of N-desmethyl LY333531 was correlated with markers of nine P450s in a bank of 20 human liver microsomes.
The only significantcorrelation observed was with the form-selective activity for CYP3A.
Of the nine cDNA-expressed P450s examined, only CYP3A4 and CYP2D6formedN-desmethyl LY333531 .
However, CYP3A4formed N-desmethyl LY333531 at a rate 57-fold greater than that observed with CYP2D6.
Thus, CYP3A is responsible for the formation of N-desmethyl LY333531 .
Less potent inhibition by these compounds of metabolism mediated by the other three P450s examined was observed.
In conclusion, CYP3A is primarily responsible for forming N-desmethyl LY333531 .
Therefore, alterations in the activity of this enzyme have the potential to affect LY333531 clearance .
In addition, LY333531 and its metabolite are predicted to be potential inhibitors of CYP2D6-mediated reactions in vivo.
In incubations with human liver microsomes, quinidine, an inhibitor of CYP2D6, demonstrated little inhibition of metabolite formation while ketoconazole, an inhibitor of CYP3A, demonstrated almost complete inhibition.
LY333531 and N-desmethyl LY333531 were also examined for their ability to inhibit metabolism mediated by CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP3A, and CYP1A2.
LY333531 and N-desmethyl LY333531 were found to competitively inhibit CYP2D6 with calculated K(i) values of 0.17 and 1.0 microM , respectively.
Cytochrome P450 3A4-mediated bioactivation of raloxifene: irreversible enzyme inhibition and thiol adduct formation.
Raloxifene is a selective estrogen receptor modulator which is effective in the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.
The nature of the inhibition was irreversible and was NADPH- and preincubation time-dependent, with K(I) and k(inact) values estimated at 9.9 microM and 0.16 min(-1) , respectively.
Subsequently, GSH adducts of raloxifene were identified in incubations with human liver microsomes; substitution with GSH occurred at the 5- or 7-position of the benzothiophene moiety or at the 3'-position of the phenol ring, with the 7-glutathionyl derivative being most abundant based on LC/MS and NMR analyses.
These adducts are postulated to derive from addition of GSH to raloxifene arene oxides followed by dehydration and aromatization.
Alternatively, raloxifenemay be oxidized to an extended quinone intermediate, which then is trapped by GSH conjugation.
The GSH adducts also were detected in incubations of raloxifene with rat or human hepatocytes, while the corresponding N-acetylcysteine adducts were identified in the bile and urine from rats treated orally with the drug at 5 mg/kg.
Taken together, these data indicate that P450 3A4-mediated bioactivation of raloxifene in vitro is accompanied by loss of enzyme activity.
The significance of these findings with respect to the clinical use of raloxifene remains to be determined.
We report herein that cytochrome P450 (P450)3A4 is inhibited by raloxifene in human liver microsomal incubations.
The observed loss of P450 3A4 activity was attenuated partially by glutathione (GSH) , implying the involvement of a reactive metabolite(s) in the inactivation process.
The bioactivation of raloxifene most likely is catalyzed by P450 3A4, since the formation of GSH adducts was almost abolished when liver microsomes were pretreated with ketoconazole or with an inhibitory anti-P450 3A4 IgG.
CYP3A4induction by drugs: correlation between a pregnane X receptor reporter gene assay and CYP3A4 expression in human hepatocytes.
Induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is determined typically by employing primary culture of human hepatocytes and measuring CYP3A4 mRNA, protein and microsomal activity.
Recently a pregnane X receptor (PXR) reporter gene assay was established to screen CYP3A4 inducers .
To evaluate results from the PXR reporter gene assay with those from the aforementioned conventional assays, 14 drugs were evaluated for their ability to induce CYP3A4 and activate PXR.
Sandwiched primary cultures of human hepatocytes from six donors were used and CYP3A4 activity was assessed by measuring microsomal testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase activity.
Hepatic CYP3A4 mRNA and protein levels were also analyzed using branched DNA technology/Northern blotting and Western blotting, respectively.
In general, PXR activationcorrelated with the induction potential observed in human hepatocyte cultures.
It is concluded that the PXR reporter gene assay is a reliable and complementary method to assess the CYP3A4induction potential of drugs and other xenobiotics.
Clotrimazole, phenobarbital, rifampin, and sulfinpyrazone highly activated PXR and increased CYP3A4 activity;carbamazepine, dexamethasone, dexamethasone-t-butylacetate, phenytoin, sulfadimidine , and taxol weakly activated PXR and induced CYP3A4 activity, and methotrexate and probenecid showed no marked activation in either system .
Ritonavir and troleandomycin showed marked PXR activation but no increase (in the case of troleandomycin) or a significant decrease (in the case of ritonavir) in microsomal CYP3A4 activity.
Thalidomide metabolism by the CYP2C subfamily.
This research investigated the biotransformation of thalidomide by cytochrome P-450 (CYP).
We used liver microsomes from humans and/or animals and the recombinant specific CYP isozymes to investigate CYP-mediated metabolism of thalidomide.
Thalidomide was biotransformed into 5-hydroxythalidomide (5-OH) and diastereomeric 5'-hydroxythalidomide (5'-OH) by liver microsomes.
The human liver microsomes with higher CYP2C19 activity formed more metabolites than those with lower CYP2C19 activity and had less activity in metabolite formations than those from rats.
Recombinant human CYP2C19 and rat CYP2C6 isozymes were primarily responsible for forming these metabolites, and the male rat-specific CYP2C11formed only 5'-OH .
5-OH was subsequently hydroxylated to 5,6-dihydroxythalidomide by CYP2C19, CYP2C9, and CYP1A1 in humans and by CYP2C11, CYP1A1, CYP2C6, and CYP2C12 in rats.
The contribution of the CYP2C subfamily was supported by the immunoinhibition study using human liver microsomes.
We discovered that the polymorphic enzyme CYP2C19 is responsible for 5- and 5'-hydroxylation of thalidomide in humans.
In rats, thalidomide was hydroxylated extensively by CYP2C6 as well as the sex-specific enzyme CYP2C11.
Incubations with S-mephenytoin and omeprazole, substrates of CYP2C19, inhibited metabolism by human liver microsomes, supporting the involvement of CYP2C19.
alpha-Naphthoflavone , an inhibitor of CYP1A , simultaneously stimulated the 5-OH formation and inhibited cis-5'-OH formation catalyzed by human liver microsomes.
When we used the microsomes from treated rats, the metabolite formations did not increase by inducers for CYP1A , CYP2B , CYP2E , CYP3A, or CYP4A, suggesting that these could not be involved in the main metabolic pathway in rats.
Trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole are selective inhibitors of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9, respectively.
To evaluate the inhibitory effects of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole on cytochrome P450 (P450) isoforms, selective marker reactions for CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4 were examined in human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP2C8 and CYP2C9.
The in vivo drug interactions of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole were predicted in vitro using [I]/( [I] + K(i)) values.
With concentrations higher than 100 microMtrimethoprim and 500 microMsulfamethoxazole, both drugs lost their selectivity for the P450 isoforms.
With concentrations ranging from 5 to 100 microM, trimethoprim exhibited a selective inhibitory effect on CYP2C8-mediated paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylation in human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP2C8, with apparent IC(50) (K(i)) values of 54 microM (32 microM) and 75 microM , respectively.
With concentrations ranging from 50 to 500 microM, sulfamethoxazole was a selective inhibitor of CYP2C9-mediated tolbutamide hydroxylation in human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP2C9, with apparent IC(50) (K(i)) values of 544 microM (271 microM) and 456 microM , respectively.
Based on estimated total hepatic concentrations (or free plasma concentrations) of the drugs and the scaling model, one would expect in vivo in humans 80% (26%) and 13% (24%)inhibition of the metabolic clearance of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 substrates by trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, respectively.
In conclusion, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole can be used as selective inhibitors of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 in in vitro studies.
In humans, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazolemay inhibit the activities of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9, respectively.
Induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 in primary human hepatocytes and activation of the human pregnane X receptor by tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen .
Tamoxifen is a widely utilized antiestrogen in the treatment and chemoprevention of breast cancer.
Clinical studies document that tamoxifen administration markedly enhances the systemic elimination of other drugs.
Additionally, tamoxifen enhances its own clearance following repeated dosing.
The mechanisms that underlie these clinically important events remain unresolved.
Maximal induction was achieved at the 5 microM level.
We also observed corresponding increase in the CYP3A4 immunoreactive protein and mRNA levels.
The efficacy of tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen relative to rifampicin for hPXR activation was approximately 30 and 60%, respectively.
Furthermore, the CYP3A4inductionmay be a result of hPXR activation.
These findings have important implications for optimizing the use of tamoxifen and in the development of newer antiestrogens.
Here, we report that tamoxifen and its metabolite 4-hydroxytamoxifen markedly induce cytochrome P450 3A4, a drug-metabolizing enzyme of central importance, in primary cultures of human hepatocytes.
Tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (1-10 microM) significantlyincreased the CYP3A4 expression and activity (measured as the rate of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation).
At this level, tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen caused a 1.5- to 3.3-fold (mean, 2.1-fold) and 3.4- to 17-fold (mean, 7.5-fold)increase in the CYP3A4 activity, respectively.
In comparison, rifampicin treatment resulted in a 6- to 16-fold (mean, 10.5-fold)increase.
Furthermore, tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen efficaciously activated the human pregnane X receptor (hPXR; also known as the steroid xenobiotic receptor), a key regulator of CYP3A4 expression.
Our results indicate that the mechanism of tamoxifen-mediated alteration in drug clearance pathways in humans may involve CYP3A4induction by the parent drug and/or its metabolite.
Inhibitory effects of H1-antihistamines on CYP2D6- and CYP2C9-mediated drug metabolic reactions in human liver microsomes.
To screen the inhibitory effects of H1-antihistamines on hepatic bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation and on tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation in human liver microsomes.
Bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation and tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation were used as index reactions for CYP2D6 and CYP2C9, respectively.
The metabolites of both reactions were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography and were used as indicators of whether CYP2D6 or CYP2C9 activities were inhibited or unaffected by the agents.
Further studies in humans, especially in poor metabolizers of CYP2D6, will be required to confirm these findings.
All five H1-antihistamines studied showed a concentration-dependent inhibition of CYP2D6-mediated bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation with 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values of 32-109 microM .
Cyclizine and promethazine showed inhibitory effects on tolbutamide 4-methylhydroxylation with IC20 values of 85 microM and 88 microM , respectively.
Tripelennamine, chlorpheniramine, and diphenhydramine showed no inhibitory effects on CYP2C9.
All five H1-antihistamines studied inhibited CYP2D6markedly, but only cyclizine and promethazine inhibited CYP2C9 at concentrations above that usually seen in plasma.
Promethazine and chlorpheniramine inhibited CYP2D6 at concentrations that are very close to their therapeutic plasma concentrations.
Effects of flavonoids isolated from Scutellariae radix on cytochrome P-450 activities in human liver microsomes.
A series of flavonoids isolated from Scutellariae radix were evaluated for their effects on cytochrome P-450 (CYP) activities in human liver microsomes.
Kinetic analysis revealed that the mechanism of inhibition varied according to the flavonoids.
These results suggest that flavonoids tested are inhibitors of hepatic CYP1A2 and that the extracts of Scutellariae radix, widely used as a hepatoprotective agent, may protect the liver through the prevention of CYPIA2-induced metabolic activation of protoxicants.
All flavonoids did not substantially inhibit pentoxyresorufin O-deethylation (CYP2B 1), mephenytoin 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6), and chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1) activities (IC50: >50 microM).
Baicalein and 2',5,6',7-tetrahydroxyflavone inhibited hepatic testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A4) activity with a IC50 of 17.4 and 7.8 microM, respectively.
Oroxylin A inhibiteddiclofenac 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C9) activity with a IC50 of 6.7 microM.
In contrast, all flavonoids tested inhibited hepatic caffeine N'-demethylation (CYP1A2) with IC50 values ranging from 0.7 to 51.3 microM.
Human cytochrome P450s involved in the metabolism of 9-cis- and 13-cis-retinoic acids .
The purpose of this work was to identify the principal human cytochrome P450s (CYPs) involved in the metabolism of the retinoic acid (RA) isomers, 9-cis- and 13-cis-RA, by using a combination of techniques including human liver microsomes (correlation of activity and inhibition), and lymphoblast microsomes expressing a single CYP.
Concerning the 9-cis-RA , 4-OH- and 4-oxo-9-cis-RA were formed with human liver microsomes, and their formation correlated with activities linked to CYPs 3A4/5 , 2B6, 2C8, 2A6, and 2C9.
The use of lymphoblast microsomes expressing a single human CYP identified CYPs 2C9>2C8>3A7 as the most active in the formation of 4-OH-9-cis-RA .
With regard to 13-cis-RA , specific P450 activities linked to CYPs 2B6, 2C8, 3A4/5 , and 2A6 were correlated with the formation of 4-OH- and 4-oxo-13-cis-RA .
Microsomes expressing a single CYP identified CYPs 3A7, 2C8, 4A11, 1B1, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 3A4 (decreasing activity) in the formation of 4-OH-13-cis-RA .
In conclusion, adult human CYPs 2C9, 2C8, 3A4 have been identified as active in the 9-cis-RA metabolism , whereas CYPs 3A4 and 2C8 were active in 13-cis-RA metabolism .
The fetal form CYP3A7 was also identified as very active in either 9-cis- or 13-cis-RA metabolism .
The role of these human CYPs in the biological response or resistance to RA isomers remains to be determined.
The use of CYP-specific inhibitors in human liver microsomes disclosed that the formation of the 4-OH-9-cis-RA was best inhibited by sulfaphenazole (72%) and quercetin (66%), whereas ketoconazole and troleandomycin inhibited its formation by 55 and 38%, respectively; the formation of 4-OH-13-cis-RA was best inhibited by troleandomycin (54%) and ketoconazole (46%), whereas quercetin was a weak inhibitor (14%).
Inhibition of cytochromes P450 by antifungal imidazole derivatives.
The interactions of a panel of antifungal agents with cytochromes P450 (P450s) , as a means of predicting potential drug-drug interactions, have not yet been investigated.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the specificity and selectivity of five antifungal agents using selective probe reactions for each of the eight major P450s .
The index reactions used were phenacetin O-deethylation (for CYP1A2), coumarin 7-hydroxylation (CYP2A6), diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9), omeprazole 5-hydroxylation (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6), 7-ethoxy-4- trifluoromethylcoumarin deethylation (CYP2B6), chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1), and omeprazole sulfonation (CYP3A4).
Five antifungal agents that include an imidazole moiety (clotrimazole, miconazole, sulconazole , tioconazole, and ketoconazole) were examined in cDNA-expressing microsomes from human lymphoblast cells or human liver microsomes.
All inhibitors studied demonstrated nonselective inhibition of P450s.
Therefore, this class of compounds is likely to result in significant drug-drug interactions in vivo.
Ketoconazole seemed to be the most selective for CYP3A4, although it also inhibited CYP2C9.
High-affinity inhibition was seen for CYP1A2 (sulconazole and tioconazole K(i) , 0.4 microM ), CYP2B6 (miconazole K(i), 0.05 microM ; sulconazole K(i), 0.04 microM ), CYP2C19 (miconazole K(i) , 0.05 microM ; sulconazole K(i) , 0.008 microM ; tioconazole K(i) , 0.04 microM ), CYP2C9 ( sulconazole K(i) , 0.01 microM), CYP2D6 (miconazole K(i) , 0.70 microM ; sulconazole K(i) , 0.40 microM ), CYP2E1 (tioconazole K(i) , 0.4 microM), and CYP3A4 (clotrimazole K(i) , 0.02 microM ; miconazole K(i) , 0.03 microM; tioconazole K(i) , 0.02 microM).
Role of cytochrome P450 in estradiol metabolism in vitro.
Catechol estrogens and 16alpha-hydroxy estrogen are important metabolites that cause carcinogenesis.
This study was aimed to study the role of cytochrome P450 in estradiol metabolism .
The estradiol metabolites were determined with HPLC-ECD.
Correlation of estradiol metabolites production between cytochrome P450 activity, the inhibitory effect of specific inhibitors and enzyme catalyzing kinetics were studied in cDNA-expressed P450 or human liver microsomes.
This result suggests that in human liver microsomes CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 play an important role in 2-hydroxy estradiol formation.
At low substrate concentration, 17beta -hydroxy dehydrogenation dominated the estradiol metabolism , but at high substrate concentration, 2-hydroxylation exceeded 17beta-hydroxy dehydrogenation to become the important mechanism.
CYP1A2, CYP3A4, and CYP2C9 catalyze the estradiol 2-hydroxylation.
CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2C8 have high activity in catalyzing 17beta-hydroxy dehydrogenation in cDNA expressed P450, but CYP1A2 is the most important enzyme in catalyzing estradiol 2-hydroxylation.
Using furafyllin and troleandomycin to inhibit CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 in liver microsomes, it was found that the 2-hydroxylation had been inhibited about the same amount.
CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 are two important enzymes catalyzing the main estradiol 2-hydroxylation metabolism pathway at high substrate concentrations.
17beta-hydroxy dehydrogenation is the main metabolism pathway at low concentrations, and CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2C8may have high catalyzing activity.
Comparative studies to determine the selective inhibitors for P-glycoprotein and cytochrome P4503A4 .
It has been suggested that cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) and MDR1 P-glycoprotein (P-gp) act synergistically to limit the bioavailability of orally administered agents.
In order to determine the relative role of these proteins, it is essential to identify a selective inhibitor for either P-gp or CYP3A4.
In the present investigation, comparative studies were performed to examine the effect of inhibitors on the function of these proteins.
The IC50 of P-gp function, determined by examining the inhibition of the transcellular transport of vinblastine across Caco-2 monolayers, was in the order PSC833 < ketoconazole, verapamil < N-(2(R)-hydroxy-1(S)-indanyl)-5-(2(S)-(1,1-dimethylethylaminocarbonyl)-4-(furo(2,3-b)pyridin-5-yl)methyl)piperazin-1-yl)-4(S)-hydroxy-2(R)-phenylmethylpentanamide (L-754,394).
In contrast, the IC50 of CYP3A4 function, determined by examining the inhibition of the metabolism of midazolam by intestinal and liver microsomes, was in the order L-754,384 < ketoconazole < PSC 833 and verapamil.
The ratio of IC50 for P-gp to that for CYP3A4 was more than 200 for L-754,394, 60 ~ 150 for ketoconazole, 1.5 for verapamil, and 0.05 for PSC 833.
Collectively, it was demonstrated that PSC 833 and L-754,394 can be used as selective inhibitors of P-gp and CYP3A4, respectively.
In vitro evaluation of valproic acid as an inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 isoforms: preferential inhibition of cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9).
To evaluate the potency and specificity of valproic acid as an inhibitor of the activity of different human CYP isoforms in liver microsomes.
Using pooled human liver microsomes, the effects of valproic acid on seven CYP isoform specific marker reactions were measured: phenacetin O-deethylase (CYP1A2), coumarin 7-hydroxylase (CYP2A6), tolbutamide hydroxylase (CYP2C9), S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan O-demethylase (CYP2D6), chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylase (CYP2E1) and midazolam 1'-hydroxylase (CYP3A4).
However, minimal inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1 activities was observed.
Inhibition of CYP2C9 can explain some of the effects of valproic acid on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs, such as phenytoin.
Co-administration of high doses of valproic acid with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP2C9may result in significant drug interactions.
Valproic acid competitively inhibited CYP2C9 activity with a Ki value of 600 microM.
In addition, valproic acid slightly inhibited CYP2C19 activity (Ki = 8553 microM, mixed inhibition) and CYP3A4 activity ( Ki = 7975 microM, competitive inhibition).
The inhibition of CYP2A6 activity by valproic acid was time-, concentration- and NADPH-dependent ( KI = 9150 microM, Kinact =0.048 min(-1)), consistent with mechanism-based inhibition of CYP2A6.
Valproic acid inhibits the activity of CYP2C9 at clinically relevant concentrations in human liver microsomes.
Characterization of the selectivity and mechanism of cytochrome P450 inhibition by dimethyl-4,4'-dimethoxy-5,6,5',6'-dimethylenedioxybiphenyl-2,2'-dicarboxylate.
In vitro studies with human liver microsomes and cytochrome P450 (P450) prototype substrates were performed to characterize the selectivity and mechanism of inhibition of P450 by dimethyl-4,4'-dimethoxy-5,6,5',6'-dimethylenedioxybiphenyl-2,2'-dicarboxylate (DDB).
Spectral analysis indicated that the formation of metabolite-P450 complex having absorbance at 456 nm was concentration-dependent; 5 to 33% of the total P450 was complexed in rat and human liver microsomes after a 5-min incubation with DDB.
In addition, microsomal incubations with DDB in the presence of NADPH resulted in a loss of spectral P450 content, which was restored after adding K(3)Fe(CN)(6).
This complex formation resulted in a time-dependent loss of CYP3A-catalyzed marker activity (testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation) in human liver microsomes.
The inhibition was only partially restored upon dialysis.
These results collectively suggest that formation of a metabolite-CYP3A complex with DDB was responsible for the CYP3A-selective time-dependent loss of catalytic function of CYP3A.
DDB was found to be a strong inhibitor of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation activity (CYP3A4) with a K(i) value of 0.27 +/- 0.21 microM.
At higher concentrations, DDB marginally inhibitedcaffeine N(3)-demethylation (CYP1A2), diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9), and dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6) activities, but this compound had no effect on CYP2A6-, CYP2C19-, and CYP2E1-mediated reactions.
Diazinon is activated by CYP2C19 in human liver.
Phosphorothioate compounds are used throughout the world as agricultural and domestic pesticides.
Here, the activation of the phosphorothioate diazinon to diazoxon in human liver is described.
In an initial study using three human liver microsomal samples, K(m) for diazoxon formation varied markedly (31, 208, and 660 microM; V(max)1125, 685, and 1028 pmol/min/mg protein, respectively), suggesting the involvement of more than one P450 enzyme.
A wide variation in activity was found using 50 microMdiazinon as substrate, (11-648 pmol/min/mg protein, n = 15), whereas, with 500 microM, variation was less (164-978 pmol/min/mg protein).
The putative low-affinity component (500 microMdiazinon) correlated with both S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase (r = 0.714; p < 0.005) and high-affinity phenacetin O-deethylase activity (r = 0.625; p < 0.05).
These data suggest contributions from CYP2C19, CYP1A2, and CYP3A4.
None of the inhibitors affected the high-affinity component.
These data indicate that CYP2C19 is the major enzyme involved in diazinon activation in human liver, while other enzymes including CYP1A2may play a more minor role.
Among eight P450-catalyzed reactions, the putative high-affinity component (50 microM diazinon) correlated with S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase activity (r = 0.686, p < 0.01), suggesting the involvement of CYP2C19.
This activity was partially inhibited by furafylline, troleandomycin, and ketoconazole.
Of seven heterologously expressed human P450 enzymes, CYP2C19activated diazinon (500 microM) at the fastest rate, followed by CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C9.
Both hepatic microsomal S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase and high-affinity phenacetin O-deethylase activities were strongly inhibited by diazinon (IC50< 2.5 microM), while no effect was seen on midazolam 1'-hydroxylase activity.
Gemfibrozil is a potent inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 2C9.
The in vitro inhibitory effects of gemfibrozil on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2 (phenacetin O-deethylation), CYP2A6 (coumarin 7-hydroxylation), CYP2C9 (tolbutamide hydroxylation), CYP2C19 (S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation), CYP2D6 (dextromethorphan O-deethylation), CYP2E1 (chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation), and CYP3A4 (midazolam 1'-hydroxylation) activities were examined using pooled human liver microsomes.
The in vivo drug interactions of gemfibrozil were predicted in vitro using the [I]/( [I] + K(i) ) values.
Based on [I]/( [I] + K(i) ) values calculated using peak total (or unbound) plasma concentration of gemfibrozil, 96% (56%), 86% (24%), and 64% (8%)inhibition of the clearance of CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP1A2 substrates could be expected, respectively.
Gemfibrozil strongly and competitively inhibited CYP2C9 activity, with a K(i) ( IC(50) ) value of 5.8 (9.6) microM.
In addition, gemfibrozil exhibited somewhat smaller inhibitory effects on CYP2C19 and CYP1A2 activities, with K(i) (IC(50)) values of 24 (47) microM and 82 (136) microM, respectively.
With concentrations up to 250 microM, gemfibrozil showed no appreciable effect on CYP2A6, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4 activities.
In conclusion, gemfibrozil inhibits the activity of CYP2C9 at clinically relevant concentrations, and this is the likely mechanism by which gemfibrozil interacts with CYP2C9 substrate drugs, such as warfarin and glyburide.
Gemfibrozilmay also impair clearance of CYP2C19 and CYP1A2 substrates, but inhibition of other CYP isoforms is unlikely.
In vitro metabolism of tegaserod in human liver and intestine: assessment of drug interactions.
Tegaserod is a selective 5-HT(4) receptor partial agonist with promotile activity in the gastrointestinal tract.
This study was designed to describe the metabolic pathways of tegaserod in the human liver and small intestine in vitro, to identify the enzymes involved in tegaserod metabolism, and to investigate the effect of tegaserod on CYP-catalyzed reactions involving other compounds.
Tegaserod was metabolized in human liver microsomes to O-desmethyl tegaserod at a low rate.
In human liver slices, direct N-glucuronidation of tegaserod at the guanidine nitrogens (M43.2, M43.8, and M45.3) was found, with M43.8 being the major metabolite.
Human small intestine slices also metabolized tegaserod to the N-glucuronides, suggesting a contribution of the small intestine to the presystemic metabolism.
5-Methoxyindole-3-carboxylic acid (M29.0), the main metabolite in human plasma, was generated in vitro by a sequence of reactions starting with nonenzymatic acid-catalyzed hydrolysis, followed by enzymatic oxidation and conjugation with glucuronic acid.
However, these K(i) values are approximately 140-foldgreater than the maximal tegaserod plasma concentrations following the clinically relevant 6-mg oral dose given to healthy volunteers.
M29.0, the main circulating metabolite, did not demonstrate any inhibitory potential toward cytochrome P450 enzymes in vitro.
Therefore, clinically relevant metabolic drug interactions with tegaserod seem unlikely.
This metabolite was also formed by cDNA expressed CYP2D6, and the reaction in human liver microsomes was inhibited by quinidine.
Tegaserod inhibited CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, and CYP3A only to a small extent with IC(50) values >30 microM.
Tegaserod more effectively inhibited CYP1A2 and CYP2D6 with K(i) values of 0.84 and 0.85 microM, respectively.
Different enantioselective 9-hydroxylation of risperidone by the two human CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 enzymes.
The antipsychotic agent risperidone, is metabolized by different cytochrome P-450 (CYP) enzymes, including CYP2D6, to the active 9-hydroxyrisperidone, which is the major metabolite in plasma.
Two enantiomers, (+)- and (-)-9-hydroxyrisperidone might be formed, and the aim of this study was to evaluate the importance of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4/CYP3A5 in the formation of these two enantiomers in human liver microsomes and in recombinantly expressed enzymes.
The enantiomers of 9-hydroxyrisperidone were analyzed with high pressure liquid chromatography using a chiral alpha-1 acid glycoprotein column.
A much higher formation rate was observed for (+)-9-hydroxyrisperidone than for (-)-9-hydroxyrisperidone in microsomes prepared from six individual livers.
Recombinant human CYP2D6produced only (+)-9-hydroxyrisperidone, whereas a lower formation rate of both enantiomers was detected with expressed CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.
In vivo data from 18 patients during treatment with risperidone indicate that the plasma concentration of the (+)-enantiomer is higher than that of the (-)-enantiomer in extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6.
These findings clearly suggest that CYP2D6 plays a predominant role in (+)-9-hydroxylation of risperidone, the major metabolic pathway in clinical conditions, whereas CYP3A catalyzes the formation of the (-)-9-hydroxymetabolite.
Further studies are required to evaluate the pharmacological/toxic activity of both enantiomers.
The formation of (+)-9-hydroxyrisperidone was strongly inhibited by quinidine, a potent CYP2D6 inhibitor, whereas ketoconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, strongly inhibited the formation of (-)-9-hydroxyrisperidone.
Metabolism of vanoxerine, 1- [2- [bis(4-fluorophenyl)methoxy]ethyl]-4-(3-phenylpropyl)piperazine, by human cytochrome P450 enzymes.
Vanoxerine (1- [2- [bis(4-fluorophenyl)methoxy]ethyl]-4-(3-phenylpropyl)piperazine; GBR12909) is a promising agent for the treatment of cocaine dependence.
Knowledge of the major pathway for GBR12909metabolism is important for prediction of the likelihood of drug-drug interactions, which may affect the therapeutic clinical outcome, when this agent is used in cocaine-dependent individuals receiving multiple drug therapy.
We studied biotransformation of GBR12909 in human liver microsomes (n = 4), human hepatocytes, and microsomes containing cDNA-expressed human P450 isoforms with GBR12909 concentrations within the range of steady-state plasma concentrations detected in healthy volunteers.
A high-pressure liquid chromatography assay was used to measure parent GBR12909 and its primary metabolite.
GBR12909 was metabolized by human liver microsomes, hepatocytes, and cDNA-expressed human P450s to a single metabolite.
cDNA-expressed P450 3A4 metabolized GBR12909 to a greater extent than 2C8 and 2E1.
These data suggest the possibility that multiple P450 isoforms may be involved in human GBR12909 metabolism but that CYP3A appears to be the major enzyme responsible for human GBR12909 biotransformation.
Ketoconazole, a selective inhibitor of CYP3A, reducedGBR12909biotransformation in human liver microsomes and primary hepatocytes by 92 +/- 2 and 92.4 +/- 0.4%, respectively.
Quercetin (an inhibitor of CYP2C8/3A4) was a less effective inhibitor producing 62 +/- 22% inhibition in human liver microsomes and 54 +/- 35% in hepatocytes.
Other P450 selective inhibitors did notdecreaseGBR12909biotransformation more than 29% in either human liver microsomes or hepatocytes with the exception of chlorzoxazone (CYP2E1), which inhibitedGBR12909 biotransformation by 71.4 +/- 18.5% in primary human hepatocytes.
Ciprofloxacin (CYP1A2), sulfaphenazole (CYP2C9), quinidine (CYP2D6), chlorzoxazone (CYP2E1), and mephenytoin (CYP2C19) did not demonstrate statistically significant inhibition(p > 0.05) of GBR12909biotransformation in liver microsomes.
Metabolism of 2,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)-7-benzyloxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin by human hepatic CYP isoforms: evidence for selectivity towards CYP3A4.
1.
The metabolism of 2,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)-7-benzyloxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin (BFBFC) to 7-hydroxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin (HFC) was studied in human liver microsomes and in cDNA-expressed human liver CYP isoforms.
For purposes of comparison, some limited studies were also performed with 7-benzyloxyquinoline (7BQ).
2.
Initial interactive docking studies with a homology model of human CYP3A4 indicated that BFBFC was likely to be a selective substrate for CYP3A4 with a relatively high binding affinity, due to the presence of several key hydrogen bonds with active site amino acid residues.
3.
Kinetic analysis of NADPH-dependent BFBFC metabolism to HFC in three preparations of pooled human liver microsomes revealed mean (+/- TSEM) Km and Vmax = 4.6 +/- 0.3 microM and 20.0 +/- 3.8 pmol/min/mg protein, respectively.
4.
The metabolism of BFBFC to HFC was determined in a characterized bank of 24 individual human liver microsomal preparations employing a BFBFC substrate concentration of lO microM (i.e. around twice Km).
5.
While 10O microMBFBFC was metabolized to HFC by cDNA-expressed CYP3A4, little or nometabolism was observed with cDNA-expressed CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1.
6.
7.
Kinetic analysis of NADPH-dependent 7BQmetabolism to 7-hydroxyquinoline (7HQ) in human liver microsomes revealed Km and Vmax = 70 microM and 3.39 nmol/min/mg protein, respectively.
8.
While 80 microM7BQ was metabolized to 7HQ by cDNA-expressed CYP3A4, only low rates of metabolism were observed with cDNA-expressed CYPIA2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1.
9.
BFBFCmay be a useful fluorescent probe substrate for human hepatic CYP3A4, but compared with 7BQ has only a low rate of metabolism in human liver microsomes.
Good correlations(r2 = 0.736-0.904) were observed between BFBFCmetabolism and markers of CYP3A isoforms.
The metabolism of 10 microMBFBFC in human liver microsomes was markedly inhibited by 5-50 microMtroleandomycin and 0.2-5 microMketoconazole, but stimulated by 0.2-10 microM alpha-naphthoflavone.
The metabolism of 10 microMBFBFC in human liver microsomes was also markedly inhibited by an antibody to CYP3A4.
In summary, by correlation analysis, the use of cDNA-expressed CYP isoforms, chemical inhibition and inhibitory antibodies, BFBFCmetabolism in human liver microsomes appears to be primarily catalysed by CYP3A4.
Inhibition of human CYP1A2 activity in vitro by methylxanthines: potent competitive inhibition by 8-phenyltheophylline.
1.
Humans are exposed in vivo to methylxanthines by dietary ingestion, as well as from their use as therapeutic agents.
The inhibitory effect of a series of these compounds on high-affinity phenacetin O-deethylase activity in the human liver microsomal fraction, a measure of CYP1A2 activity, has been evaluated.
2.
Paracetamol, the product of phenacetin O-deethylase activity, was analysed by gas chromatography/negative-ion mass spectrometry using a novel bistrifluoromethylbenzoyl/ trimethylsilyl derivative, and incubation conditions for assessing high-affinity phenacetin O-deethylase activity were examined and optimized.
3.
4.
5.
No inhibition of any of these activities was observed.
6.
1-Methylxanthine, caffeine, theophylline, 8-methylxanthine, pentoxyfylline and 3isobutyl-1-methylxanthine caused moderate inhibition with IC50 = 260, 140, 120, 100, 62 and 36 microM respectively.
8-Phenyltheophylline was a potent competitive inhibitor of high-affinity phenacetin O-deethylase activity with an IC50 = 0.7 microM and Ki = 0.11 microM.
The specificity of inhibition by 8-phenyltheophylline was assessed by measuring its effect on debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase (CYP2D6), terfenadine hydroxylase (CYP3A4), chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylase (CYP2E1) and tolbutamide 4-hydroxylase (CYP2C9) activities in human liver microsomal fraction.
The potency and specificity of 8-phenyltheophylline as an inhibitor of human hepatic CYP1A2 indicate that the compound may be useful as a chemical inhibitor of this enzyme for further in vitro studies.
Inhibitory effects of verapamil and diltiazem on simvastatinmetabolism in human liver microsomes.
To determine the effects of verapamil and diltiazem on simvastatinmetabolism in human liver microsomes and to compare their inhibitory potencies and CYP3A4inactivation parameters with those reported previously for mibefradil.
Simvastatinmetabolism was investigated in human liver microsomes in the presence and absence of verapamil or diltiazem (0.1-250 microM).
Kinetics of CYP3A4inactivation by verapamil and diltiazem were determined using testosterone as the substrate.
The IC50 values ranged from 4.8 to 5.6 microM on preincubation of verapamil for 30 min in the presence of an NADPH-generating system.
Corresponding IC50 values for diltiazem ranged from 110-127 microM and from 21-27 microM, respectively.
The IC50 values for coincubation of verapamil and diltiazem were 46- and 220-foldhigher, respectively, than those reported previously for mibefradil, and 16- and 71-foldhigher, respectively, for preincubation.
Thus, the results of this study suggest that verapamil and diltiazem are less likely than mibefradil to cause acute drug interactions with simvastatin in vivo.
When verapamil was coincubated with simvastatin, IC50 values ranged from 23 to 26 microM for all major metabolites.
Verapamil and diltiazeminhibitedtestosterone 6beta-hydroxylation in a time- and concentration-dependent manner, key features of mechanism-based inactivation.
Values for the inactivation parameters kinact and KI were 0.15 +/- 0.04 min-1 (mean +/- s.d.) and 2.9 +/- 0.6 microM, respectively, for verapamil and 0.07 +/- 0.01 min-1 and 3.3 +/- 1.5 microM, respectively, for diltiazem.
However, verapamil and diltiazem are moderate mechanism-based inhibitors of CYP3A4 and therefore may still cause significant inhibition of simvastatinmetabolism in vivo during chronic therapy.
Role of CYP2C9 polymorphism in losartanoxidation.
Losartan, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, is oxidized by hepatic cytochromes P450 to an active carboxylic acid metabolite, E-3174.
The aim of the present investigation was to study the contribution of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 in losartanoxidation in vitro and to evaluate the role of CYP2C9 polymorphism.
Kinetic properties of different genetic CYP2C9 variants were compared both in a yeast expression system and in 25 different samples of human liver microsomes where all known genotypes of CYP2C9 were represented.
Microsomes were incubated with losartan (0.05-50 microM), and the formation of E-3174 was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography to estimate V(max), K(m), and intrinsic clearance for all individual samples.
In comparison to the CYP2C9.1 variant, oxidation of losartan was significantly reduced in yeast expressing the rare CYP2C9.2 or CYP2C9.3 variants.
Moreover, the rate of losartanoxidation was lower in liver microsomes from individuals hetero- or homozygous for the CYP2C9*3 allele, or homozygous for the CYP2C9*2 allele.
The difference between the common and rare CYP2C9 variants was mainly explained by a lower V(max), both in yeast and human liver microsomes.
In summary, these in vitro results indicate that CYP2C9 is the major human P450 isoenzyme responsible for losartanoxidation and that the CYP2C9 genotype contributes to interindividual differences in losartanoxidation and activation.
Sulfaphenazole, a CYP2C9 inhibitor, blocked the formation of E-3174 at low losartan concentrations (<1 microM), whereas the inhibitory effect of triacetyloleandomycin, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, was significant only at high concentrations of losartan (>25 microM).
Species difference in stereoselective involvement of CYP3A in the mono-N-dealkylation of disopyramide.
1.
To determine which CYP isoenzyme is involved in the N-dealkylation of disopyramide (DP)metabolism in human and dog, and to determine the stereoselectivity of DPmetabolism with human CYP and dog CYP isoenzymes, the following in vitro metabolism studies of DP were conducted: correlation between human CYP isoenzyme activities and DPmetabolism with human liver microsomes; inhibition of DPmetabolism in human and dog liver microsomes with chemical inhibitors of CYP isoenzymes; inhibition of DP metabolism in human microsomes with human CYP antibodies; inhibition of DP metabolism in dog liver microsomes with human and dog CYP antibodies; metabolism of DP with human (CYP3A4) and dog (CYP3A12) cDNA-expressed isoenzymes; determination of Km and Vmax of DP enantiomers by using cDNA-expressed CYP3A4 and CYP3A12.
2.
DP was metabolized by cDNA-expressed CYP3A isoenzymes.
In dog liver microsomes, DPmetabolism was inhibited by ketoconazole, TA and dog anti-CYP3A12.
DP was also metabolized by cDNA-expressed CYP3A12.
3.
CYP3A4 and CYP3A12 are the principal isoenzymes involved in DPmetabolism in human and dog respectively.
There was no stereoselectivity in N-dealkylation of DP by human CYP3A4.
However, there was notable stereoselectivity in the N-dealkylation by dog CYP3A12.
In human liver microsomes, the formation of the mono-N-dealkylated disopyramide (MNDP) metabolite was best correlated with CYP3A4 activities.
DPmetabolism was substantially inhibited by ketoconazole, troleandomycin (TA); and human CYP3A4 antibody.
Clinical pharmacokinetics of fluvastatin.
Fluvastatin, the first fully synthetic HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, has been shown to reduce cholesterol in patients with hyperlipidaemia, to prevent subsequent coronary events in patients with established coronary heart disease, and to alter endothelial function and plaque stability in animal models.
Fluvastatin is relatively hydrophilic, compared with the semisynthetic HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, and, therefore, it is extensively absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
After absorption, it is nearly completely extracted and metabolised in the liver to 2 hydroxylated metabolites and an N-desisopropyl metabolite, which are excreted in the bile.
Approximately 95% of a dose is recovered in the faeces, with 60% of a dose recovered as the 3 metabolites.
The 6-hydroxy and N-desisopropyl fluvastatin metabolites are exclusively generated by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 and do not accumulate in the blood.
CYP2C9, CYP3A4, CYP2C8 and CYP2D6 form the 5-hydroxy fluvastatin metabolite.
Because of its hydrophilic nature and extensive plasma protein binding, fluvastatin has a small volume of distribution with minimal concentrations in extrahepatic tissues.
The pharmacokinetics of fluvastatin are not influenced by renal function, due to its extensive metabolism and biliary excretion; limited data in patients with cirrhosis suggest a 30%reduction in oral clearance.
Age and gender do not appear to affect the disposition of fluvastatin.
In addition to being a CYP2C9substrate, fluvastatin demonstrates inhibitory effects on this isoenzyme in vitro and in vivo.
These alterations have not been shown to be clinically significant.
There are inadequate data evaluating the potential interaction of fluvastatin with warfarin and phenytoin, 2 CYP2C9 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, and caution is recommended when using fluvastatin with these agents.
Fluvastatin does not appear to have a significant effect on other CYP isoenzymes or P-glycoprotein-mediated transport in vivo.
CYP3A4 inhibitors (erythromycin, ketoconazole and itraconazole) have no effect on fluvastatin pharmacokinetics, in contrast to other HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors which are primarily metabolised by CYP3A and are subject to potential drug interactions with CYP3Ainhibitors.
Coadministration of fluvastatin with gastrointestinal agents such as cholestyramine, and gastric acid regulating agents (H2 receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors), significantly alters fluvastatin disposition by decreasing and increasing bioavailability, respectively.
The nonspecific CYP inducerrifampicin (rifampin)significantlyincreasesfluvastatin oral clearance.
In human liver microsomes, fluvastatinsignificantly inhibits the hydroxylation of 2 CYP2C9 substrates, tolbutamide and diclofenac.
The oral clearances of the CYP2C9 substrates diclofenac, tolbutamide, glibenclamide (glyburide) and losartan are reduced by 15 to 25% when coadministered with fluvastatin.
Evaluation of methoxsalen, tranylcypromine, and tryptamine as specific and selective CYP2A6 inhibitors in vitro.
CYP2A6 is the principle enzyme metabolizingnicotine to its inactive metabolite cotinine.
In this study, the selective probe reactions for each major cytochrome P450 (P450) were used to evaluate the specificity and selectivity of the CYP2A6 inhibitorsmethoxsalen, tranylcypromine, and tryptamine in cDNA-expressing and human liver microsomes.
Phenacetin O-deethylation (CYP1A2), coumarin 7-hydroxylation (CYP2A6), diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9), omeprazole 5-hydroxylation (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6), 7-ethoxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin deethylation (CYP2B6), p-nitrophenol hydroxylation (CYP2E1), and omeprazole sulfonation (CYP3A4) were used as index reactions.
Tranylcypromine [particularly R-(+) isomer], tryptamine, and methoxsalen are specific and relatively selective for CYP2A6 and may be useful in vivo to increase smoking by inhibiting nicotinemetabolism with a low risk of metabolic drug interactions.
Apparent K(i) values for inhibition of P450s' (1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4) activities showed that tranylcypromine, methoxsalen, and tryptamine have high specificity and relative selectivity for CYP2A6.
In cDNA-expressing microsomes, tranylcypromine inhibitedCYP2A6 (K(i) = 0.08 microM) with about 60- to 5000-foldgreater potency relative to other P450s.
Methoxsalen inhibitedCYP2A6 (K(i) = 0.8 microM) with about 3.5- 94-foldgreater potency than other P450s, except for CYP1A2 (K(i) = 0.2 microM).
Tryptamine inhibitedCYP2A6 (K(i) = 1.7 microM) with about 6.5- 213-foldgreater potency relative to other P450s, except for CYP1A2 (K(i) = 1.7 microM).
Similar results were also obtained with methoxsalen and tranylcypromine in human liver microsomes.
R-(+)-Tranylcypromine, (+/-)-tranylcypromine, and S-(-)-tranylcypromine competitively inhibitedCYP2A6-mediated metabolism of nicotine with apparent K(i) values of 0.05, 0.08, and 2.0 microM, respectively.
Involvement of CYP2B6 in n-demethylation of ketamine in human liver microsomes.
Ketamine is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) leading to production of pharmacologically active products and contributing to drug excretion.
We identified the CYP enzymes involved in the N-demethylation of ketamine enantiomers using pooled human liver microsomes and microsomes from human B-lymphoblastoid cells that expressed CYP enzymes.
The kinetic data in human liver microsomes for the (R)- and (S)-ketamine N-demethylase activities could be analyzed as two-enzyme systems.
The K(m) values were 31 and 496 microM for (R)-ketamine, and 24 and 444 microM for (S)-ketamine.
Among the 12 cDNA-expressed CYP enzymes examined, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4 showed high activities for the N-demethylation of both enantiomers at the substrate concentration of 1 mM.
CYP2B6 had the lowest K(m) value for the N-demethylation of (R)- and (S)-ketamine (74 and 44 microM, respectively).
Also, the intrinsic clearance (CL(int): V(max)/K(m)) of CYP2B6 for the N-demethylation of both enantiomers were 7 to 13 times higher than those of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4.
These results suggest that the high affinity/low capacity enzyme in human liver microsomes is mediated by CYP2B6, and the low affinity/high capacity enzyme is mediated by CYP2C9 and CYP3A4.
CYP2B6 mainly mediates the N-demethylation of (R)- and (S)-ketamine in human liver microsomes at therapeutic concentrations (5 microM).
Orphenadrine (CYP2B6 inhibitor, 500 microM) and sulfaphenazole (CYP2C9 inhibitor, 100 microM) inhibited the N-demethylase activities for both enantiomers (5 microM) in human liver microsomes by 60 to 70%, whereas cyclosporin A (CYP3A4 inhibitor, 100 microM) failed to inhibit these activities.
In addition, the anti-CYP2B6 antibody inhibited these activities in human liver microsomes by 80%, whereas anti-CYP2C antibody and anti-CYP3A4 antibody failed to inhibit these activities.
Inhibition of drug metabolism in human liver microsomes by nizatidine, cimetidine and omeprazole.
1.
The inhibitory effects of cimetidine, nizatidine and omeprazole on the metabolic activity of CYP2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A were investigated in human liver microsomes.
2.
The ability to inhibitCYP2C9 varied with incubation time, as measured by the metabolic rate constant for the substrates.
Therefore, suitable substrates and incubation times must be selected in inhibition studies examining metabolic clearance and the mechanism of inhibition of these drugs.
3.
To avoid drug-drug interactions, care needs to be taken to select suitable medicines for co-administration with anti-ulcer drugs.
Both cimetidine and omeprazole inhibited each of the CYP subfamily enzymes; in particular, omeprazole extensively inhibited the hydroxylation of S-mephenytoin (CYP2C19, Ki = 7.1 microM).
Nizatidine exhibited noinhibition of any of the CYP isoforms examined.
Cimetidine inhibited the hydroxylation of tolbutamide but not of diclofenac, whereas omeprazole inhibited the hydroxylation of diclofenac but not that of tolbutamide.
Nizatidine did not inhibit the metabolism of cisapride, glibenclamide, benidipine and simvastatin.
Omeprazole inhibited the metabolism of cisapride (Ki = 0.4 microM), glibenclamide (11.7 microM) and benidipine (6.5 microM), whereas cimetidine inhibited the metabolism of glibenclamide (11.6 microM).
The role of CYP2C in the in vitro bioactivation of the contraceptive steroid desogestrel.
Desogestrel is a 3-deoxo progestogenic steroid that requires bioactivation to 3-ketodesogestrel.
In these studies we have attempted to define the pathway of 3-ketodesogestrel formation and characterise the enzymes responsible for this biotransformation in vitro.
Initial studies using deuterated desogestrel confirmed that desogestrel is metabolised by human liver microsomes via 3alpha-hydroxy and 3beta-hydroxydesogestrel to 3-ketodesogestrel.
Metabolites were analysed by radiometric high-performance liquid chromatography and were identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and by cochromatography with authentic standards.
Desogestrel was metabolised by microsomes from lymphoblasts containing cDNA-expressed CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 to 3alpha-hydroxydesogestrel with small amounts of 3beta-hydroxydesogestrel also being observed.
The Km value for 3alpha-hydroxylation by CYP2C9 cell line microsomes was 6.5 microM and the corresponding Vmax value was 1269 pmole. mg-1.min-1.
There was a significant negative correlation between 3-ketodesogestrel and CYP3A4 content/activity in a panel of human livers suggesting that the further metabolism of 3-ketodesogestrel is mediated by CYP3A4.
This was confirmed in incubations with inhibitory antibodies.
Whereas an anti-CYP2C9/2C19 antibody completely abolished desogestrelmetabolism, anti-CYP3A4 and anti-CYP2E1 were not inhibitory.
We conclude that CYP2C9 and possibly CYP2C19 and important isoforms catalysing the initial hydroxylation of desogestrel.
Sulfaphenazole potently inhibited 3alpha-hydroxydesogestrel formation by CYP2C9 microsomes with a Ki value of 0.91 microM.
Sulfaphenazole partially inhibited 3alpha-hydroxydesogestrel and 3-ketodesogestrel formation in human liver microsomes indicating a possible in vivo role for CYP2C9.
In addition, when sulfaphenazole was combined with S-mephenytoin, further inhibition of 3alpha-hydroxydesogestrel formation was observed suggesting a possible role for CYP2C19.
In-vitro characterization of the cytochrome P450 isoenzymes involved in the back oxidation and N-dealkylation of reduced haloperidol.
In-vitro studies were performed using human liver microsomes and c-DNA-expressed human P450 isoforms to identify the cytochrome P450 isoenzyme(s) involved in the back oxidation and N-dealkylation of reduced haloperidol.
Back oxidation and N-dealkylation of reduced haloperidol were assessed by measuring the formation of haloperidol and 4-(4-chlorophenyl)-4-hydroxypiperidine (CPHP), respectively.
The haloperidol and CPHPformation rates as a function of substrate concentration, measured in three livers, followed monophasic enzyme kinetics.
For haloperidolformationKm values ranged from 51-59 microM, and Vmax values from 190-334 pmol mg(-1) min(-1); for CPHPformationKm values were 44-49 microM, and Vmax values 74-110 pmol mg(-1) min(-1).
Among the recombinant human CYP isoforms tested, CYP3A4 exhibited the highest activity with respect to haloperidol and CPHPformation rates, with no detectable effect of CYP1A2, CYP2D6 and CYP2C9.
These results strongly suggest that back oxidation and N-dealkylation of reduced haloperidol in human liver microsomal preparations are mediated by CYP3A4.
Haloperidol and CPHPformation rates in the nine liver preparations were significantlycorrelated with dextromethorphan N-demethylase activity (a marker of CYP3A4 activity), but not with the CYP2D6, CYP1A2 and CYP2C9 activity.
Ketoconazole and troleandomycin, inhibitors of CYP3A4, inhibited competitively both haloperidol and CPHPformation, with a Ki value lower than 0.2 microM for ketoconazole and lower than 0.3 microM for troleandomycin.
Sulphaphenazole (CYP2C9), furafylline (CYP1A2) and quinidine and paroxetine (CYP2D6) gave only little inhibition (IC50> 60 microM).
CPHP and haloperidolformation were, moreover, enhanced by alpha-naphthoflavone, an effect known for CYP3A4 mediated reactions.
Anti-CYP3A4 antibodies strongly inhibitedhaloperidol and CPHPformation, whereas CYP2D6 antibodies did not.
Microsomal metabolism of delavirdine: evidence for mechanism-based inactivation of human cytochrome P450 3A.
Administration of delavirdine, an HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitor, to rats or monkeys resulted in apparent loss of hepatic microsomal CYP3A and delavirdine desalkylation activity.
The catalytic activity loss was saturable and was characterized by a Ki of 21.6 +/- 8.9 microM and a kinact of 0.59 +/- 0.08 min-1.
An apparent partition ratio of 41 was determined with cDNA expressed CYP3A4, based on the substrate depletion method.
Incubation of [14C]delavirdine with microsomes from several species resulted in irreversible association with an approximately 50 kDa protein, as demonstrated by SDS-PAGE/autoradiography.
Binding to the protein was NADPH dependent, glutathione insensitive, proportional to the level of CYP3A expression and was inhibited by ketoconazole, a specific CYP3Ainhibitor.
NADPH-dependent irreversible binding to human and rat total microsomal protein was demonstrated following exhaustive extraction of microsomal protein.
These results suggest that delavirdine can inactivateCYP3A and has the potential to slow the metabolism of coadministered CYP3A substrates.
Human CYP3A catalyzes the formation of desalkyl delavirdine and 6'-hydroxy delavirdine, an unstable metabolite, while CYP2D6 catalyzes only desalkyl delavirdine.
CYP2D6catalyzed desalkyl delavirdineformation was linear with time (up to 30 min) but when catalyzed by cDNA expressed CYP3A4 or human liver microsomes the reaction rate declined progressively with time.
Coincubation with triazolam showed that delavirdine caused a time- and NADPH-dependent loss of CYP3A4 activity in human liver microsomes as measured by triazolam 1'-hydroxylation.
Binding was decreased in the presence of glutathione and appeared to be related to expression level of CYP3A.
Inhibition of desipramine hydroxylation (Cytochrome P450-2D6) in vitro by quinidine and by viral protease inhibitors: relation to drug interactions in vivo.
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions with viral protease inhibitors are of potential clinical importance.
An in vitro model was applied to the quantitative identification of possible interactions of protease inhibitors with substrates of cytochrome P450-2D6.
Biotransformation of desipramine (DMI) to hydroxydesipramine (OH-DMI), an index reaction used to profile activity of human cytochrome P450-2D6, was studied in vitro using human liver microsomes.
Quinidine and four viral protease inhibitors currently used to treat human immunodeficiency virus infection were tested as chemical inhibitors in this system.
Formation of OH-DMI from DMI was consistent with Michaelis-Menten kinetics, having a mean Km value of 11.7 microM (range: 9.9-15.3 microM).
The in vitro findings, together with observed plasma ritonavir concentrations, provided a reasonable quantitative forecast of this interaction, whereas estimated unbound plasma or intrahepatic ritonavir concentrations yielded poor quantitative forecasts.
Thus the in vitro model correctly identifies ritonavir as a potent and clinically important inhibitor of human P450-2D6.
Other protease inhibitorsmay also inhibit2D6 activity in humans, but with lower potency than ritonavir.
Quinidine, a highly potent and relatively selective inhibitor of P450-2D6, strongly inhibited OH-DMI formation with an apparent competitive mechanism, having a mean inhibition constant of 0.16 microM (range: 0.13-0.18 microM).
All four protease inhibitors impaired OH-DMI formation; the pattern was consistent with a mixed competitive-noncompetitive mechanism.
Mean inhibition constants (small numbers indicating greaterinhibiting potency) were as follows: ritonavir, 4.8 microM; indinavir, 15.6 microM; saquinavir, 24.0 microM; nelfinavir, 51.9 microM.
In a clinical pharmacokinetic study, coadministration of ritonavir with DMIinhibitedDMIclearance by an average of 59%.
3,3'-diindolylmethane induces CYP1A2 in cultured precision-cut human liver slices.
1.
The effect of 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), an indole derivative derived from cruciferous vegetables, on cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms in the CYP1A and CYP3A subfamilies has been studied in 72-h cultured human liver slices.
2.
In cultured human liver slices 50 microMDIMinduced 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase and to a lesser extent 7-methoxyresorufin O-demethylase activities.
3.
Western immunoblotting of liver slice microsomes was performed with antibodies to rat CYP1A2 and human CYP3A4.
4.
Some variability in the magnitude of induction of enzyme activities by DIM was observed in four human liver samples examined.
5.
These results demonstrate that cultured human liver slices can be used to evaluate the effect of chemicals derived from cruciferous and other vegetables on CYP isoforms.
Compared with control liver slice microsomes (dimethyl sulphoxide-only treated), DIMinduced levels of CYP1A2 but had little effect on levels of CYP3A4.
The treatment of human liver slices with 2 microg/ml of the polycholorinated biphenyl mixture Aroclor 1254 also resulted in an induction of levels of CYP1A2, but had no effect on CYP3A4.
These results demonstrate that DIM induces CYP1A isoforms in cultured human liver slices.
For 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase, the magnitude of induction by 50 microMDIM ranged from 2.3- to 19.3-fold.
Involvement of CYP1A2 in mexiletinemetabolism.
Mexiletine has been reported to be hydroxylated by cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) in humans.
However, the involvement of CYP1A2 in the metabolism of mexiletine has been proposed based on the interaction with theophylline which is mainly metabolized by CYP1A2.
The aim of this study was to clarify the role of human CYP1A2 in mexiletinemetabolism.
Human CYP isoforms involved in mexiletinemetabolism were investigated using microsomes from human liver and B-lymphoblastoid cells expressing human CYPs.
The contributions of CYP1A2 and CYP2D6 to mexiletinemetabolism were estimated by the relative activity factor (RAF).
Mexiletine p- and 2-hydroxylase activities in microsomes from nine human livers correlatedsignificantly with bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase activity (r = 0.907, P < 0.001 and r = 0.886, P < 0.01, respectively).
However, the Km values of the expressed CYP1A2 (approximately 15 microM) were almost identical with those of the expressed CYP2D6 (approximately 22 microM) and human liver microsomes.
Mexiletine is a substrate of CYP1A2.
The data obtained in this study suggest that the interaction of mexiletine with theophylline might be due to competitive inhibition of CYP1A2.
Mexiletine p- and 2-hydroxylase activities in human liver microsomes were inhibited by ethoxyresorufin and furafylline as well as quinidine.
Microsomes of B-lymphoblastoid cells expressing human CYP1A2 exhibited lower mexiletine p- and 2-hydroxylase activities than those expressing human CYP2D6.
It was estimated by RAF that the major isoform involved in mexiletinemetabolism was CYP2D6, and the contribution of CYPIA2 to both mexiletine p- and 2-hydroxylase activities was 7-30% in human liver microsomes.
Characterization of the selectivity and mechanism of human cytochrome P450 inhibition by the human immunodeficiency virus-protease inhibitornelfinavir mesylate.
In vitro studies with human liver microsomes and P450 probe substrates were performed to characterize selectivity and mechanism of cytochrome P450 inhibition by nelfinavir mesylate.
At therapeutic concentrations (steady-state plasma concentrations approximately 4 microM), nelfinavir was found to be a competitive inhibitor of only testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase (CYP3A4) with a Ki concentration of 4.8 microM.
Inhibition of CYP3A4 by nelfinavir in vitro was NADPH-dependent requiring the catalytic formation of a metabolite or a metabolic intermediate.
The catechol metabolite of nelfinavir (M3) was considered unlikely to be responsible for inhibition as the addition of catechol O-methyl transferase, S-adenosyl methionine, and ascorbic acid to the preincubation mixture did not protect against the loss of testosterone 6beta-hydroxylase activity.
Also, the addition of M3 to human liver microsomes did not inhibitCYP3A4.
Although incubations with nelfinavir showed a time- and concentration-dependent loss of CYP3A4 activity, the partial or complete recovery of enzyme activity upon dialysis indicated that inhibition was reversible.
Microsomal incubations with nelfinavir and NADPH did not result in a loss of spectral P450 content compared with the NADPH control.
Collectively, these results suggest that the probable mechanism for CYP3A4 inhibition by nelfinavir is a transient metabolic intermediate or stable metabolite that coordinates tightly but reversibly to the heme moiety of the P450.
At supratherapeutic concentrations, nelfinavir competitively inhibiteddextromethorphan O-demethylase (CYP2D6), S-mephenytoin 4-hydroxylase (CYP2C19), and phenacetin O-deethylase (CYP1A2) with Ki concentrations of 68, 126, and 190 microM respectively.
Nelfinavir did not appreciably inhibittolbutamide 4-hydroxylase (CYP2C9), paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylase (CYP2C8), or chlorzoxaxone 6beta-hydroxylase (CYP2E1) activities.
The inhibitory potency of nelfinavir toward CYP3A4 suggested the possibility of in vivo inhibition of this isoform, whereas in vivo inhibition of other P450s was considered unlikely.
In a one-sequence crossover study in 12 healthy volunteers, nelfinavirinhibited the elimination of the CYP3A substrate terfenadine and the carboxylate metabolite of terfenadine.
The 24-hr urinary recoveries of 6beta-hydroxycortisol were reduced by an average of 27% during nelfinavir treatment, consistent with CYP3Ainhibition by nelfinavir.
Glutathione, N-acetylcysteine, and catalase did not attenuate CYP3A4 inhibition by nelfinavir.
Prediction of drug-drug interactions of zonisamidemetabolism in humans from in vitro data.
The purposes of this study were to identify the P450 enzyme (CYP) responsible for zonisamidemetabolism in humans by using expressed human CYPs and to predict drug interaction of zonisamide in vivo from in vitro data.
Ten expressed human CYPs and human liver microsomes were used in the experiments for the identification of enzymes responsible for zonisamidemetabolism and for the prediction of drug-drug interactions of zonisamidemetabolism in humans from in vitro data, respectively.
Two-sulfamoylacetyl phenol, a reductive metabolite of zonisamide, was measured by the HPLC method.
However, an intrinsic clearance, Vmax/kM, of CYP3A4 was much higher than those of CYP2C19 and CYP3A5.
From the point of view of enzyme amount in human liver CYPs isoform and their intrinsic clearance, it was suggested that CYP3A4 is mainly responsible for zonisamidemetabolism in human CYPs.
We estimated the possibility and degree of change of zonisamideclearance in vivo in clinical dose range from in vitro inhibition constant of other drugs against zonisamidemetabolism (Ki) and unbound inhibitor concentration in blood (Iu) in clinical usage.
On the other hand, there may be lack of interaction of zonisamidemetabolism by dihydroergotamine, itraconazole and triazolam in clinical dose range.
We demonstrated that: (1) zonisamide is metabolized by recombinant CYP3A4, CYP2C19 and CYP3A5, (2) the metabolism is inhibited to a variable extent by known CYP3A4/5 substrates and/or inhibitors in human liver microsomes, and (3) in vitro-in vivo predictive calculations suggest that several compounds demonstrating CYP3A4-affinity might cause in vivo drug-drug interactions with zonisamide.
From the experiments using ten expressed human CYPs, CYP2C19, CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 were shown to be capable of catalyzing zonisamide reduction.
Zonisamidemetabolism in human liver microsomes was markedly inhibited by cyclosporin A, dihydroergotamine, ketoconazole, itraconazole, miconazole and triazolam.
Clearance of zonisamide was maximally estimated to decrease by 31%, 23% and 17% of the clearance without inhibitors i.e. ketoconazole, cyclospolin A and miconazole, respectively.
Fluconazole and carbamazepine are estimated to decrease by 5-6% of the clearance of zonisamide.
Metabolism of 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (NSC 330507) by murine and human hepatic preparations.
17-(Allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17AAG), a compound that is proposed for clinical development, shares the ability of geldanamycin to bind to heat shock protein 90 and GRP94, thereby depleting cells of p185erbB2, mutant p53, and Raf-1.
Urine and plasma from mice treated i.v. with 17AAG contained six materials with absorption spectra similar to that of 17AAG.
Therefore, in vitro metabolism of 17AAG by mouse and human hepatic preparations was studied to characterize: (a) the enzymes responsible for 17AAG metabolism; and (b) the structures of the metabolites produced.
These materials had retention times on high-performance liquid chromatography of approximately 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9 min.
When incubated in an aerobic environment with 17AAG, murine hepatic supernatant (9000 x g) produced each of these compounds; the 4-min metabolite was the major product.
This metabolism required an electron donor, and NADPH was favored over NADH.
Metabolic activity resided predominantly in the microsomal fraction.
Metabolism was decreased by approximately 80% in anaerobic conditions and was essentially ablated by CO. Microsomes prepared from human livers produced essentially the same metabolites as produced by murine hepatic microsomes, but the 2-min metabolite was the major product, and the 4-min metabolite was next largest.
There was no metabolism of 17AAG by human liver cytosol.
Metabolism of 17AAG by human liver microsomes also required an electron donor, with NADPH being preferred over NADH, was inhibited by approximately 80% under anaerobic conditions, and was essentially ablated by CO. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis of human and mouse in vitro reaction mixtures indicated the presence of materials with molecular weights of 545, 601, and 619, compatible with 17-(amino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17AG), an epoxide, and a diol, respectively.
The metabolite with retention time of 4 min was identified as 17AG by cochromatography and mass spectral concordance with authentic standard.
Incubation of 17AAG with cloned CYP3A4 produced metabolites 4 and 6.
Incubation of 17AAG with cloned CYP3A4 and cloned microsomal epoxide hydrolase produced metabolites 2 and 4, with greatlydecreased amounts of metabolite 6.
These data imply that metabolite 2 is a diol and metabolite 6 is an epoxide.
Mass spectral fragmentation patterns and the fact that 17AG is not metabolized argue for the epoxide and diol being formed on the 17-allylamino portion of 17AAG and not on its ansamycin ring.
These data have implications with regard to preclinical toxicology and activity testing of 17AAG as well as its proposed clinical development because: (a) production of 17AG requires concomitant production of acrolein from the cleaved allyl moiety; and (b) 17AG, which was not metabolized by microsomes, has been described as being as active as 17AAG in decreasing cellular p185erbB2.
Human microsomal metabolism of 17AAG was inhibited by ketoconazole, implying 3A4 as the responsible cytochrome P450 isoform.
Incubation of 17AAG with human hepatic microsomes and cyclohexene oxide, a known inhibitor of microsomal epoxide hydrolase, did not affect the production of metabolite 4 but decreased the production of metabolite 2 while increasing the production of metabolite 6.
Overlapping substrate specificities of cytochrome P450 3A and P-glycoprotein for a novel cysteine protease inhibitor.
K02 (morpholine-urea-Phe-Hphe-vinylsulfone), a newly developed peptidomimetic, acts as a potent cysteine protease inhibitor, especially of cathepsins B and L (which are associated with cancer progression) and cruzain (a cysteine protease of Trypanosoma cruzi, which is responsible for Chagas' disease).
Here we investigated features of the disposition of K02 using in vitro systems, characterizing the interaction of the drug with human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A and P-glycoprotein (P-gp), a mediator of multidrug resistance (MDR) to cancer chemotherapy and a countertransporter in the intestine that limits oral drug bioavailability.
P-gp functions as an ATP-dependent drug efflux pump to reduce intracellular cytotoxic concentrations.
An HPLC assay was developed to analyze K02 and its metabolites formed in human liver microsomes.
Three major primary metabolites were determined by LC/MS/MS to be hydroxylated products of the parent compound.
A rabbit anti-CYP3A polyclonal antibody (200 microl antibody/mg microsomal protein) produced 75-94% inhibition of the formation of these three hydroxylated metabolites.
An identical metabolite formation profile for K02 was observed with cDNA-expressed human CYP3A4 (Gentest).
These data demonstrate that K02 is a substrate for CYP3A.
Transport studies with [14C]K02, using MDR1-transfected Madin-Darby canine kidney cell monolayers in the Transwell system, demonstrated that the basolateral-to-apical flux of K02 across MDR1-transfected Madin-Darby canine kidney cells was markedlygreater than the apical-to-basolateral flux (ratio of 63 with 10 microM [14C]K02).
This suggests that K02 is also a P-gp substrate.
These studies are important for formulating strategies to increase the absorption and/or decrease the elimination of K02 and to optimize its delivery to malignant cells and parasite-infected host cells.
Ketoconazole (5 microM), a selective CYP3Ainhibitor, produced up to 75% inhibition, whereas other CYP-specific inhibitors, i.e. quinidine (CYP2D6), 7,8-benzoflavone (CYP1A2), and sulfaphenazole (CYP2C9), showed nosignificant effects.
Formation of 1'-hydroxymidazolam, the primary human midazolam metabolite, was markedly inhibited by K02 via competitive processes, which suggests the potential for drug-drug interactions of K02 with other CYP3A substrates.
K02 significantly inhibited the photoaffinity labeling of P-gp with azidopine and LU-49888, a photoaffinity analogue of verapamil.
Identification and characterization of human cytochrome P450 isoforms interacting with pimozide.
Using human liver microsomes (HLMs) and recombinant human cytochrome P450 (CYP450) isoforms, we identified the major route of pimozidemetabolism, the CYP450 isoforms involved, and documented the inhibitory effect of pimozide on CYP450 isoforms.
Pimozide was predominantly N-dealkylated to 1,3-dihydro-1-(4-piperidinyl)-2H-benzimidazol-2-one (DHPBI).
The formation rate of DHPBI showed biphasic kinetics in HLMs, which suggests the participation of at least two activities.
These were characterized as high-affinity (K(m1) and Vmax1) and low-affinity (K(m2) and Vmax2) components.
The ratio of Vmax1 (14 pmol/min/mg protein)/K(m1) (0.73 microM) was 5.2 times higher than the ratio of Vmax2 (244 pmol/min/mg protein)/K(m2) (34 microM).
K(m2) was 91 times higher than K(m1).
The formation rate of DHPBI from 25 microMpimozide in nine human livers correlatedsignificantly with the catalytic activity of CYP3A (Spearman r = 0.79, P = .028), but not with other isoforms.
The K(m) values derived with recombinant CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 were 5.7 microM and 36.1 microM, respectively.
Pimozidemetabolism is likely to be subject to interindividual variability in CYP3A and CYP1A2 expression and to drug interactions involving these isoforms.
Pimozide itself may inhibit the metabolism of drugs that are substrates of CYP2D6.
Potent inhibition of DHPBI formation from 10 microMpimozide was observed with ketoconazole (88%), troleandomycin (79%), furafylline (48%) and a combination of furafylline and ketoconazole (96%).
Recombinant human CYP3A4catalyzed DHPBI formation from 10 microMpimozide at the highest rate (V = 2.2 +/- 0.89 pmol/min/pmol P450) followed by CYP1A2 (V = 0.23 +/- 0.08 pmol/min/pmol P450), but other isoforms tested did not.
Pimozide itself was a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6 in HLMs when preincubated for 15 min (Ki = 0.75 +/- 0.98 microM) and a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A (Ki = 76.7 +/- 34.5 microM), with nosignificant effect on other isoforms tested.
Our results suggest that pimozidemetabolism is catalyzed mainly by CYP3A, but CYP1A2 also contributes.
Ipriflavone as an inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 enzymes.
1.
Reduction of theophyllinemetabolism and elimination were observed in a theophylline-treated patient during Ipriflavone administration.
After withdrawal of Ipriflavone, the serum theophylline level decreased to an extent similar to that found before administration of Ipriflavone.
The effects of Ipriflavone and its major metabolites 7-hydroxy-isoflavone and 7-(1-carboxy-ethoxy)-isoflavone on cytochrome P450 activities were studied in vitro in human liver microsomes from three donors.
2.
The parent compound and its dealkylated metabolite were strong inhibitors exhibiting Ki values around 10-20 microM, while 7-(1-carboxy-ethoxy)-isoflavone had no effect on the cytochrome P450 activities investigated.
It competitively inhibited this activity with a Ki value of 129.5 microM.
3.
The steady state concentrations of Ipriflavone and 7-hydroxy-isoflavone in plasma of patients receiving 3 x 200 mg daily doses of Ipriflavone for 48 weeks were found to be 0.33 +/- 0.32 microM and 1.44 +/- 0.77 microM, respectively.
4.
On the other hand, our in vitro findings predict some more interaction with CYP2C9.
Ipriflavone and 7-hydroxy-isoflavone competitively inhibitedphenacetin O-deethylase and tolbutamide hydroxylase activity.
7-Hydroxy-isoflavone is the only one that influenced nifedipine oxidase activity.
The results indicate that the decrease in theophyllinemetabolism observed in a patient treated with Ipriflavonemay be due to a competitive interaction of Ipriflavone or its metabolite, 7-hydroxy-isoflavone with CYP1A2.
Mutual inhibition between quinine and etoposide by human liver microsomes. Evidence for cytochrome P4503A4 involvement in their major metabolic pathways.
The mutual inhibition between quinine and etoposide with their major metabolic pathways (i.e. quinine 3-hydroxylation and etoposide 3'-demethylation) was examined in vitro by human liver microsomes.
An excellent correlation (r = 0.947, p < 0.01) between quinine 3-hydroxylase and etoposide 3'-demethylase activities in six different human liver microsomes was observed.
Etoposide inhibitedquinine 3-hydroxylation in a concentration-dependent manner with a mean IC50 of 65 microM.
The mean maximum inhibition by etoposide (100 micro) of quinine 3-hydroxylation was about 60%.
Similarly, etoposide 3'-demethylation was inhibited by quinine in a concentration-related manner with a mean IC50 value of 90 microM.
The mean maximum inhibition by quinine (100 M) of etoposide 3'-demethylation was about 52%.
Two inhibitors of CYP3A4, ketoconazole (1 microM) and troleandomycin (100 microM), inhibitedquinine 3-hydroxylation by about 90% and 80%, and etoposide 3'-demethylation by about 75% and 65%, respectively.
We conclude that quinine and etoposide mutually inhibit the metabolism of each other, consistent with the previous finding that CYP3A4 catalyzes the metabolism of both substrates.
Differential selectivity of cytochrome P450 inhibitors against probe substrates in human and rat liver microsomes.
Chemical inhibitors of cytochrome P450 (CYP) are a useful tool in defining the role of individual CYPs involved in drug metabolism.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate the selectivity and rank the order of potency of a range of isoform-selective CYP inhibitors and to compare directly the effects of these inhibitors in human and rat hepatic microsomes.
Four chemical inhibitors of human cytochrome P450 isoforms, furafylline (CYP1A2), sulphaphenazole (CYP2C9), diethyldithiocarbamate (CYP2E1), and ketoconazole (CYP3A4) were screened for their inhibitory specificity towards CYP-mediated reactions in both human and rat liver microsomal preparations.
Phenacetin O-deethylation, tolbutamide 4-hydroxylation, chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation and testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation were monitored for enzyme activity.
Although inhibitingCYP3A in rat liver it also inhibited all other reactions at concentrations < or = 5 microM.
It is evident that CYP inhibitors do not exhibit the same selectivity in human and rat liver microsomes.
This is due to differential selectivity of the inhibitors and/or differences in the CYP isoform responsible for metabolism in the different species.
Furafylline was a potent, selective inhibitor of phenacetin O-deethylation (CYP1A2-mediated) in human liver microsomes (IC50 = 0.48 microM), but inhibited both phenacetin O-deethylation and tolbutamide 4-hydroxylation (CYP2C9-mediated) at equimolar concentrations in rat liver microsomes (IC50 = 20.8 and 24.0 microM respectively).
Sulphaphenazole demonstrated selective inhibition of tolbutamide hydroxylation in human liver microsomes but failed to inhibit this reaction in rat liver microsomes.
DDC demonstrated a low level of selectivity as an inhibitory probe for chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation (CYP2E1-mediated).
DDC also inhibitedtestosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (CYP3A-mediated) in man and rat, and tolbutamide 4-hydroxylase activity in rat.
Ketoconazole was a very potent, selective inhibitor of CYP3A4 activity in human liver (IC50 = 0.04 microM).
Oxidation of histamine H1 antagonist mequitazine is catalyzed by cytochrome P450 2D6 in human liver microsomes.
Mequitazine [10-(3-quinuclidinylmethyl) phenothiazine] is a long-acting and selective histamine H1-receptor antagonist that is mainly biotransformed by human liver microsomes to yield hydroxylated and S-oxidized metabolites.
Lineweaver-Burk plots for the hydroxylation and the S-oxidation indicated that the hydroxylation occurred with a low Km (0.72 +/- .26 microM) in human liver microsomes.
Microsomes from genetically engineered human B-lymphoblastoid cells expressing cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) efficiently metabolizedmequitazine to the hydroxylated and S-oxidized metabolites.
The results indicate that CYP2D6 isozyme is a major form of CYP responsible for the metabolism of mequitazine in human liver microsomes.
Mequitazine hydroxylase was inhibited by propranolol and quinidine.
Inhibition of CYP3A-catalyzedmidazolam 1'-hydroxylase by various histamine H1 antagonists, including mequitazine, suggested that mequitazine and some other histamine H1 antagonists could also be inhibitors of CYP3A in human liver microsomes.
The In vitro hepatic metabolism of quinine in mice, rats and dogs: comparison with human liver microsomes.
The major metabolic pathway of quinine in the human has been shown to be 3-hydroxylation mediated mainly by human cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4.
In this extended in vitro study, quinine 3-hydroxylation was further investigated using microsomes from mouse, rat, dog and human livers and was compared among them in terms of the in vitro enzyme-kinetic parameters and quinine-drug interaction screenings.
In all species, 3-hydroxyquinine was the principal metabolite of quinine.
There was intra- and interspecies variability among all the kinetic parameters, and dogs exhibited a closer resemblance to humans in terms of the mean kinetic data.
Both alpha-naphthoflavone and diazepam showed an interspecies difference in quinine 3-hydroxylation: a trend toward an activation in dog and human, and a significant inhibition in mouse and rat, liver microsomes.
Antisera raised against rat CYP3A2 strongly inhibitedquinine 3-hydroxylation by about 96, 84 and 92% with mouse, rat and dog liver microsomes, respectively, but neither anti-rat 2C11 and 2E1 antisera did so with rat liver microsomes.
There was a significantcorrelation (r = 0.986, P < .001) between the CYP3A contents and the formation rates of 3-hydroxyquinine in eight human liver microsomal samples.
It is concluded that 3-hydroxyquinine is a main metabolite of quinine and that CYP3A/Cyp3a is a principal isoform involved in this metabolic pathway in the respective (rat, dog and human/mouse) species tested.
The dog and possibly the rat may be qualitatively and quantitatively suitable animal models for exploring the quinine 3-hydroxylase activity and for screening quinine-drug interactions in vitro, at certain inconsistency with the human liver microsomal data.
Ketoconazole and troleandomycin inhibited the 3-hydroxylation of quinine in all species.
Primaquine, doxycycline and tetracycline substantially inhibited the formation of 3-hydroxyquinine in rat, dog and human species, but proguanil had no such effect in any species.
Chloroquine inhibitedquinine 3-hydroxylation with rat and dog liver microsomes but not with human liver microsomes.
Inhibition of CYP2C9 by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in vitro: studies of phenytoin p-hydroxylation.
Inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP) activity by selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) has frequently been reported with regard to pathways mediated by CYP2D6, CYP3A4/5, and CYP1A2.
little data exist on the capability of SSRIs to inhibitCYP2C9.
We investigated the effect of SSRIs on p-hydroxylation of phenytoin (PPH), an established index reaction reflecting CYP2C9 activity, in an in vitro assay using liver tissue from six different human donors.
In control incubations (without inhibitor), 5-(p-hydroxy-phenyl)-5-phenylhydantoin (HPPH) formation rates were: Vmax0.023 nmol min(-1) mg(-1); Km14.3 microM.
These findings are consistent with published case reports describing SSRI-related increments in plasma phenytoin levels.
Because phenytoin has a narrow therapeutic index, plasma levels should be closely monitored when SSRIs are coadministered.
Average inhibition constants (Ki) differed significantly among the SSRIs, with fluvoxamine having the lowest Ki (6 microM) followed by R-fluoxetine (13 microM), norfluoxetine (17 microM), RS-fluoxetine (19 microM), sertraline (33 microM), paroxetine (35 microM), S-fluoxetine (62 microM), and desmethylsertraline (66 microM).
Thus, assuming comparable molar concentrations at the site of inhibition, fluvoxamine can be expected to have the highest probability of interfering with the metabolism of CYP2C9 substrates.
S-fluoxetine is on average a 5 fold weaker CYP2C9 inhibitor than either R-fluoxetine or the racemic mixture.
Both cytochromes P450 2E1 and 3A are involved in the O-hydroxylation of p-nitrophenol, a catalytic activity known to be specific for P450 2E1.
4-Nitrophenol 2-hydroxylation activity was previously shown to be mainly catalyzed by P450 2E1 in animal species and humans.
As this chemical compound is widely used as an in vitro probe for P450 2E1, this study was carried out to test its catalytic specificity.
First, experiments were carried out on liver microsomes and hepatocyte cultures of rat treated with different inducers.
Liver microsomes from pyrazole- and dexamethasone-treated rats hydroxylated p-nitrophenol with a metabolic rate increased by 2.5- and 2.7-fold vs control.
Hepatocyte cultures from dexamethasone-treated rats transformed p-nitrophenol into 4-nitrocatechol 7.8 times more than controls.
This catalytic activity was inhibited by TAO.
Similarly, hepatocyte cultures from pyrazole-treated rats hydroxylated p-nitrophenol with a metabolic ratio increased by about 8-fold vs control.
This reaction was inhibited by diethyl dithiocarbamate and dimethyl sulfoxide, both inhibitors of P450 2E1.
Second, the capability of human P450s other than P450 2E1 to catalyze the formation of 4-nitrocatechol was examined in a panel of 13 human liver microsomes.
Finally, the use of human cell lines genetically engineered for expression of human P450s demonstrated that P450 2E1 and 3A4 hydroxylated 4-nitrophenol with turnovers of 19.5 and 1.65 min-1, respectively.
In conclusion, P450 3Amay make a significant contribution to 4-nitrophenol hydroxylase activity in man and rat.
Dexamethasone treatment increased the hepatic content of P450 3A but not that of P450 2E1.
Two specific inhibitors of P450 3A catalytic activities, namely, ketoconazole and troleandomycin (TAO), inhibited up to 50% of 4-nitrophenol hydroxylation in dexamethasone-treated rats but not in controls.
Diethyl dithiocarbamate and ketoconazolereduced 4-nitrophenol hydroxylase activity by 77% (+/- 11) and 13% (+/- 16), respectively.
Furthermore, the residual activity following diethyl dithiocarbamate inhibition was significantlycorrelated with seven P450 3A4 catalytic activities.
Formation of guanoxabenz from guanabenz in human liver. A new metabolic marker for CYP1A2.
The in vitro N-hydroxylation of guanabenz as well as the corresponding N-dehydroxylation of guanoxabenz has been previously detected in biotransformation studies with microsomal fractions of different species including human hepatic microsomes.
Furthermore, the N-hydroxylation of guanabenz was found to be catalyzed by enriched cytochrome P450 (P450) fractions in reconstituted systems.
Strong correlations between 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (r = 0.96; p < 0.001), caffeine N-demethylation (r = 0.92; p < 0.001), respectively, and guanabenz N-hydroxylation activities were demonstrated in 10 human liver microsomal preparations.
Studies with microsomes from human B-lymphoblastoid cell lines expressing human cytochrome P450 enzymes proved that CYP1A2 is the major isozyme responsible for this metabolic pathway.
Further, P450 isozymes did not show any detectable conversion rates.
The N-reduction of guanoxabenz to guanabenz exhibits a significantcorrelation to the benzamidoxime N-reduction after incubation with 10 human liver microsomal preparations (r = 0.97; p < 0.001).
The formation of benzamidine from benzamidoxime was described previously to be catalyzed by the benzamidoxime reductase.
These results suggest that the guanabenz N-hydroxylation is mediated via CYP1A2, whereas the corresponding guanoxabenz N-reduction is catalyzed by an enzyme system composed of cytochrome b5, NADH cytochrome b5-reductase, and benzamidoxime reductase.
The high affinity of guanabenz to CYP1A2 and the distinct selectivity of this P450 isozyme toward guanabenz confirms the in vitro guanabenz N-hydroxylation to be a suitable metabolic marker for CYP1A2 in biotransformation studies.
The reaction was inhibited in presence of the potent CYP1A2inhibitors alpha-naphthoflavone (7, 8-benzoflavone) and furafylline.
Progesterone and testosterone hydroxylation by cytochromes P450 2C19, 2C9, and 3A4 in human liver microsomes.
Roles of human cytochrome P450 (P450 or CYP) 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 in the oxidation of progesterone and testosterone were studied in recombinant P450 enzymes and in human liver microsomes.
In vitro inhibition experiments showed that progesterone and its 17alpha- and 21-hydroxylated metabolites and 11-deoxycortisol suppressed the CYP2C19-dependent R-warfarin 7-hydroxylation activities, with progesterone being the most active.
These steroid chemicals also inhibitedCYP2C9-dependent S-warfarin 7-hydroxylation activities though lesser extents seen with those in CYP2C19 enzyme.
Recombinant CYP2C19catalyzedprogesterone to form 21-hydroxyprogesterone as a major product and 16alpha- and 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone as minor products.
CYP2C9 also had progesterone 21-hydroxylation activities, although the activities were lower than those catalyzed by CYP2C19.
Vmax/Km ratios for the progesterone 21-hydroxylation activity of CYP2C19 were determined to be 13- and 32-foldhigher than those of CYP2C9 and 3A4, respectively.
CYP3A4 oxidized progesterone to form 16alpha-, 6beta-, and 2beta-hydroxyprogesterone as major products and 21-hydroxyprogesterone as a minor product, but did not produce detectable levels of 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone.
CYP2C19 was also found to oxidize testosterone at 17-position to form androstenedione.
These results suggest that CYP2C19 plays important roles in the oxidation of progesterone and testosterone in human liver microsomes, although the physiological significance of these metabolic pathways remains unclear.
CYP2C9may have some, but lesser extent than those by CYP2C19, of the catalytic roles for the metabolism of progesterone and testosterone by human liver microsomes.
Progesterone was found to be a competitive inhibitor of CYP2C19 and CYP2C9 in human liver microsomes.
Immunoinhibition experiments suggested that anti-CYP2C9 (which inhibits both CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 catalytic activities) suppressed the progesterone 21-hydroxylation activities catalyzed by liver microsomes of humans and monkeys and that anti-CYP2C11 inhibited the progesterone 21-hydroxylation activities catalyzed by liver microsomes of male rats.
Androstenedione formationcatalyzed by liver microsomes of humans and monkeys and of male rats was suppressed by anti-CYP2C9 and anti-CYP2C11, respectively.
Differential inhibition of cytochrome P450 isoforms by the protease inhibitors, ritonavir, saquinavir and indinavir.
To compare the inhibitory potential of the HIV protease inhibitorssaquinavir, ritonavir and indinavir against CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 catalysed metabolic reactions in human liver microsomes in vitro.
Microsomes from six human livers were utilized in this study.
The probe substrates were phenacetin (CYP1A2), tolbutamide (CYP2C9), chlorzoxazone (CYP2E1) and testosterone (CYP3A4).
Metabolites were analysed by high performance liquid chromatography.
IC50 (concentration of inhibitor giving 50%decrease in enzyme activity) and, where appropriate, K(i) values were calculated.
The HIV protease inhibitors have differential effects on CYP isozymes.
There is obvious potential for clinically significant drug interactions particularly with ritonavir.
Pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies are crucial to gain an overall understanding of the beneficial and potentially harmful effects of this important group of drugs.
Ritonavir was a very potent inhibitor of CYP3A4 mediated testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (mean K(i) = 0.019 +/- 0.004 microM, mean +/- s.d.; n = 6 ) and also inhibitedtolbutamide hydroxylation (IC50 = 4.2 +/- 1.3 microM, mean +/- s.d.; n = 6).
Inhibition of phenacetin O-deethylation and chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation was negligible.
Indinavir was an order-of-magnitude less potent in inhibiting CYP3A4 (K(i) = 0.17 +/- 0.01 microM) and did not produce appreciable inhibition of the CYP1A2, CYP2C9 or CYP2E1 catalysed reactions.
Saquinavir was the least potent CYP3A4 inhibitor (K(i) = 2.99 +/- 0.87 microM) and produced some inhibition of CYP2C9 (approximately 50% at 50 microM).
Applications of primary human hepatocytes in the evaluation of pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions: evaluation of model drugs terfenadine and rifampin.
The utility of primary human hepatocytes in the evaluation of drug-drug interactions is being investigated in our laboratories.
Our initial approach was to investigate whether drug-drug interactions observed in humans in vivo could be reproduced in vitro using human hepatocytes.
Two model drugs were studied: terfenadine and rifampin, representing compounds subjected to drug-drug interactions via inhibitory and induction mechanisms, respectively.
Terfenadine was found to be metabolized by human hepatocytes to C-oxidation and N-dealkylation products as observed in humans in vivo.
Metabolism by human hepatocytes was found to be inhibited by drugs which are known to be inhibitory in vivo.
The induction effect of rifampin was observed in hepatocytes isolated from all 7 human donors studied, with ages ranging from 1.7 to 78 years.
To demonstrate that the rifampin-induction of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation could be generalized to other CYP3A4 substrates, we evaluated the metabolism of another known substrate of CYP3A4, lidocaine.
Dose-dependent induction of lidocaine metabolism by rifampin is observed.
Our results suggest that primary human hepatocytes may be a useful experimental system for preclinical evaluation of drug-drug interaction potential during drug development, and as a tool to evaluate the mechanism of clinically observed drug-drug interactions.
Ki values for the various inhibitors were derived from the in vitro metabolism data, resulting in the following ranking of inhibitory potency: For the inhibition of C-oxidation, ketoconazole > itraconazole > cyclosporin approximately troleandomycin > erythromycin > naringenin.
For the inhibition of N-dealkylation, itraconazole > or = ketoconazole > cyclosporin > or = naringenin > or = erythromycin > or = troleandomycin.
Rifampin induction of CYP3A, a known effect of rifampin in vivo, was also reproduced in primary human hepatocytes.
Induction of CYP3A4, measured as testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation, was found to be dose-dependent, treatment duration-dependent, and reversible.
Evaluation of omeprazole and lansoprazole as inhibitors of cytochrome P450 isoforms.
The human clearance of omeprazole and lansoprazole is conducted primarily by the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) system.
Efficacy data indicate few differences between these two drugs, but they may exhibit discrete drug interaction profiles.
To compare the potency and specificity of these drugs as inhibitors of CYP isoforms, we performed in vitro studies with human liver microsomal preparations.
Our data suggest that whereas the inhibitory profiles of these two drugs are similar, lansoprazolemay be the more important in vitro inhibitor of CYP2D6.
Since its inhibition is very potent and has a broad \"window of selectivity,\" omeprazole seems to be a useful, selective inhibitor of CYP2C19.
Both drugs were potent, competitive inhibitors of CYP2C19, as measured by the conversion of S-mephenytoin to 4-hydroxymephenytoin (k(i) = 3.1 +/- 2.2 microM for omeprazole, K(i) = 3.2 +/- 1.3 microM for lansoprazole).
For omeprazole, the highest concentration at which >70% inhibition of CYP2C19 was observed with nosignificant inhibitory effect on other isoforms was at least 20 times greater than K(i).
Both drugs were competitive inhibitors of CYP2C9-catalyzed conversion of tolbutamide to 4-hydroxytolbutamide (K(i) = 40.1 +/- 14.8 microM for omeprazole, K(i) = 52.1 +/- 1.4 microM for lansoprazole) and were noncompetitive inhibitors of CYP3A-catalyzed conversion of dextromethorphan to 3-methoxymorphinan (K(i) = 84.4 +/- 4.0 microM for omeprazole, K(i) = 170.4 +/- 7.1 microM for lansoprazole).
Lansoprazole was at least 5 times more potent (K(i) = 44.7 +/- 22.0 microM) than omeprazole (k(i) = 240.7 +/- 102.0 microM) as an inhibitor of CYP2D6-mediated conversion of dextromethorphan to dextrorphan.
Noinhibition of CYP1A2, assessed by measuring the conversion of phenacetin to acetaminophen, was noted.
Inhibition of human drug metabolizing cytochromes P450 by anastrozole, a potent and selective inhibitor of aromatase.
Anastrozole (2,2' [5(1H-1,2,4-triazol-1-ylmethyl)-1,3-phenylene]- bis(2-methylproprionitrile)) is a potent third-generation inhibitor of aromatase, currently marketed as a treatment for postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer.
While its potency and selectivity for inhibition of estrogen synthesis has been established in both preclinical and clinical studies, this study used in vitro methods to examine the effects of anastrozole on several drug metabolizing CYP enzymes found in human liver.
Human liver microsomes were co-incubated with anastrozole and probe substrates for CYP1A2 (phenacetin), CYP2A6 (coumarin), CYP2C9 (tolbutamide), CYP2D6 (dextromethorphan), and CYP3A (nifedipine).
The formation of the CYP-specific metabolites following co-incubation with various anastrozole concentrations was determined to establish IC50 and Ki values for these enzymes.
Dixon plots used to determine the Ki values for the inhibition of CYP1A2 and CYP3A activities by anastrozole were biphasic, indicating additional lower affinity Ki values.
While anastrozole did not inhibitCYP2A6 and CYP2D6 activities at concentrations below 500 microM, this compound inhibitedCYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP3A activities with Ki values of 8, 10, and 10 microM, respectively.
Major metabolites of anastrozole did not retain the ability to inhibit the metabolism of nifedipine (CYP3A).
The results of this study indicate that, although anastrozole can inhibitCYP1A2, 2C9, and 3A-mediated catalytic activities, this compound would not be expected to cause clinically significant interactions with other CYP-metabolized drugs at physiologically relevant concentrations achieved during therapy with Arimidex (Zeneca, Ltd., Macclesfield, UK) 1-mg.
Inhibition of coumarin 7-hydroxylase activity in human liver microsomes.
Nine organic solvents and 47 commonly used P450 substrates and inhibitors were examined for their effects on coumarin 7-hydroxylase (CYP2A6) activity in human liver microsomes.
Of the nine organic solvents examined (final concentration 1%, v/v), only methanol did not inhibit the 7-hydroxylation of coumarin (0.5 to 50 microM) by human liver microsomes.
Dioxane and tetra-hydrofuran, which are structurally related to coumarin, were the most inhibitory solvents examined.
Although the rates of coumarin 7-hydroxylation varied enormously among nine samples of human liver microsomes and cDNA-expressed CYP2A6 (Vmax = 179 to 2470 pmol/ mg protein/min), the Km for coumarin 7-hydroxylation was fairly constant (ranging from 0.50 to 0.70 microM).
In other words, these chemicals, at a final concentration of 100 microM, failed to inhibitCYP2A6 when the concentration of coumarin was equal to Km (0.50 microM).
The potency with which each chemical inhibited the 7-hydroxylation of coumarin was independent of which sample of human liver microsomes was studied.
With the exception of 8-methoxypsoralen, preincubation of human liver microsomes and NADPH with the aforementioned inhibitors did not increase their ability to inhibitCYP2A6.
The results of this study underscore the need for a systematic evaluation of the specificity of commonly used P450 inhibitors.
The following chemicals caused little or noinhibition of CYP2A6 as defined by a Ki> 200 microM: caffeine, chlorzoxazone, cimetidine, dextromethorphan, diazepam, diclofenac, erythromycin, ethinylestradiol, ethynyltestosterone, fluconazole, furafylline, furfural, hexobarbital, itraconazole, mephenytoin, methimazole, metronidazole, naringenin, naringin, nifedipine, norfloxacin, norgestrel, orphenadrine, quinidine, papaverine, phenacetin, pyrimethamine, ranitidine, spironolactone, sulfaphenazole, sulfinpyrazone, testosterone, tolbutamide, troleandomycin, and warfarin.
The following chemicals were classified as strong inhibitors of CYP2A6 (defined by Ki< 200 microM): clotrimazole, diethyldithiocarbamate, ellipticine, ketoconazole, 8-methoxypsoralen, 4-methylpyrazole, metyrapone, miconazole, alpha-naphthoflavone, nicotine, p-nitrophenol, and tranylcypromine.
One of the most potent inhibitors of coumarin 7-hydroxylase was 8-methoxypsoralen (methoxsalen), which was determined to be a mechanism-based inhibitor (suicide substrate) of CYP2A6(k(inactivation)0.5 min-1).
The most potent competitive inhibitor of CYP2A6 was tranylcypromine (Ki = 0.04 microM).
Several of the chemicals that strongly inhibitedCYP2A6, such as ketoconazole and tranylcypromine, are often used with the intention of selectively inhibiting human P450 enzymes other than CYP2A6.
Human cytochrome P450 3A4-catalyzedtestosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation and erythromycin N-demethylation. Competition during catalysis.
Cytochrome P450 3A4 is known to catalyze the metabolism of both endogenous substrates (such as the 6 beta-hydroxylation of testosterone) and many important therapeutic agents, including the N-demethylation of erythromycin.
However, erythromycin and testosterone have been reported to have little or no effect on the metabolism of each other by recombinant CYP3A4.
In an effort to understand the basis of these observations, we studied the N-demethylation of erythromycin and the 6 beta-hydroxylation of testosterone in human liver microsomes and in microsomes from cells containing recombinant human CYP3A4 and P450 reductase under a variety of experimental conditions.
However, the inhibition mechanism was complex.
When the rates of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation and erythromycin N-demethylation were determined in microsomal incubations containing both substrates at lower concentrations, the observed rates for each reaction were in good agreement with the calculated rates based on the rate equation describing simultaneous metabolism of two substrates by a single enzyme.
However, at high substrate concentrations, the kinetic results could be best explained by a mechanism involving partial competitive inhibition.
In both human liver microsomal and recombinant CYP3A4 systems, erythromycin inhibitedtestosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation in a concentration dependent manner, and vice versa.
At low substrate concentrations, testosterone and erythromycin acted as competitive inhibitors to each other.
Under these experimental conditions, an apparent competitive inhibition of testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation by erythromycin was observed, with Ki values similar to that of the K(m) values for erythromycin.
We conclude from these studies that testosterone and erythromycin mutually inhibit the metabolism of each other, consistent with the fact that CYP 3A4 catalyzes the metabolism of both substrates.
Cytochrome P450 2E1 is the principal catalyst of human oxidative halothanemetabolism in vitro.
The volatile anesthetic halothane undergoes substantial biotransformation generating metabolites that mediate hepatotoxicity.
Aerobically, halothane undergoes cytochrome P450-catalyzedoxidation to trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), bromide and a reactive intermediate that can acetylate liver proteins.
These protein neo-antigens stimulate an immune reaction that mediates severe hepatic necrosis (\"halothane hepatitis\").
This investigation identified the human P450 isoform(s) that catalyze oxidative halothanemetabolism.
Halothaneoxidation by human liver microsomes was assessed by TFA and bromide formation.
Eadie-Hofstee plots of TFA and bromide formation were both nonlinear, suggesting the participation of multiple P450s.
Conversely, at subsaturating halothane concentrations (0.30 vol%), metabolism by P450 2E1 exceeded that by P450 2A6.
Among a panel of human liver microsomes, there were significant linear correlations between halothaneoxidation and P450 2A6 activity and protein content at saturating halothane concentrations (2.4 vol%), and a significantcorrelation between metabolite formation and P450 2E1 activity (but not P450 2A6 activity) at subsaturating concentrations (0.12 vol%).
These experiments suggested P450 2A6 and 2E1 as the predominant catalysts at saturating and subsaturating halothane concentrations, respectively.
Further kinetic analysis using cDNA-expressed P450 and liver microsomes clearly demonstrated that P450 2E1 is the high affinity/low capacity isoform (Km = 0.030-0.053 vol%) and P450 2A6 is the low affinity/high capacity isoform (Km = 0.77-1.2 vol%).
Evidence was also obtained for substrate inhibition of P450 2E1.
The in vitro clearance estimates (Vmax/Km) for microsomal P450 2E1 (4.3-5.7 ml/min/g) were substantially greater than those for microsomal P450 2A6 (0.12-0.21).
These clearances, as well as rates of apparent halothaneoxidation predicted from kinetic parameters in conjunction with plasma halothane concentrations measured during clinical anesthesia in humans, demonstrated that both P450 2E1 and P450 2A6 participate in human halothanemetabolism, and that P450 2E1 is the predominant catalytic isoform.
Microsomal TFA and bromide formation were inhibited45 to 66% and 21 to 26%, respectively, by the P450 2A6 inhibitors8-methoxypsoralen and coumarin, 84 to 90% by the P450 2E1inhibitor4-methylpyrazole and 55% by diethyldithiocarbamate, an inhibitor of both P450 2A6 and 2E1.
Selective inhibitors of P450s 1A, 2B6, 2C9/10, 2D6 and 3A4 did not affect halothaneoxidation.
At saturating halothane concentrations (2.4 vol%) only cDNA-expressed P450 2A6 and 2B6catalyzedsignificant rates of TFA and bromide formation, and P450 2E1catalyzed comparatively minimal oxidation.
Distinction of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 activity by selective inhibition using fluvoxamine and Isosafrole.
Ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (EROD) has been used as a specific probe for CYP1A1 and CYP1A2.
Selective inhibition of one of these cytochromes P450 may differentiate their activity in human liver.
Four inhibitors were chosen to examine the selective inhibition of EROD activity, using cDNA of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2.
The two flavones, alpha-naphthoflavone and apigenin, while differing in potency, inhibited expressed human CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and human liver microsomes to a similar extent.
A set of equations was developed to estimate both CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 activity.
Levels of CYP1A2 in four human liver specimens ranged from 44.4 to 76.7 pmol/mg protein, which significantlycorrelated with phenacetin O-deethylase activity (r = 0.99; P < 0.001).
Low levels of CYP1A1 activity were present in all four investigated livers, ranging from 0.4 to 2.7 pmol/mg protein.
Isosafrole and fluvoxamine were found to inhibitCYP1A2 selectively, with Ki values of 14 and 800 times, respectively, lower than those for CYP1A1.
Biotransformation of parathion in human liver: participation of CYP3A4 and its inactivation during microsomal parathion oxidation.
Studies in rat liver have shown that cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes mediate the oxidative biotransformation of the phosphorothioate pesticide parathion to paraoxon and 4-nitrophenol.
Transfer of the phosphorothioate thionosulfur atom to the CYP apoprotein results in amino acid modification and enzyme inactivation.
Our study investigated the role of human hepatic CYP in parathion oxidation and their relative susceptibilities to inhibition and inactivation.
Rates of parathion oxidation varied about 10-fold in microsomes from 23 individual livers (1.72-18.33 nmol total metabolites/mg protein/min).
Linear regression of rates of parathion oxidation with those of other microsomal CYP reactions implicated CYP3A4 in the reaction.
Thus, parathion oxidation was correlated strongly with testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (r2 = 0.95, n = 11), but not with activities mediated by CYP 1A2, 2C9 or 2E1.
CYP 3A4 expressed in lymphoblastoid cell lines was an efficient catalyst of parathion oxidation, although CYP 1A2 and 2B6 also catalyzed the activity.
The CYP3A4 inhibitorsketoconazole and triacetyloleandomycin decreased the observed rate of microsomal parathion oxidation, but chemicals known to interact preferentially with other human CYP were essentially non inhibitory.
P450 was lost during parathion biotransformation in human hepatic microsomes.
Thus, incubation (10 min) of parathion (25 microM) with NADPH-supplemented microsomes led to an apparent 19 +/- 4%decrease in holo-P450 content.
Several CYP-specific oxidation reactions were inhibited and inactivated by parathion.
Testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation (mediated by CYP3A4), 7-ethylresorufin O-deethylation (CYP1A2) and tolbutamide methyl hydroxylation (CYP2C9/10), but not aniline 4-hydroxylation (CYP2E1), were inhibited effectively by parathion.
Preincubation of microsomes with parathion and NADPH intensified the extent of inhibition (i.e., elicited inactivation) of reactions mediated by 3A4 and 1A2 and, to a lesser extent, 2C9.
In summary, these findings strongly implicate CYP 3A4 as the principal catalyst of parathion oxidation in human liver, although other CYP may play a lesser role.
During parathion oxidationCYP3A4 undergoes significantinactivation.
In view of the role of this enzyme in the oxidation of many therapeutic agents, exposure to phosphorothioate pesticides may adversely affect drug elimination in humans.
()
Identification of cytochrome P450 isoforms involved in citalopram N-demethylation by human liver microsomes.
Studies to assess the enzyme kinetic behavior and to identify the cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoform(s) involved in the major metabolic pathway (N-demethylation) for citalopram (CIT), a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, were performed using human liver microsomes and cDNA-expressed human cytochrome P450 isoforms.
The N-demethylation activities showed significant correlations with the alpha- and 4-hydroxylation activities of triazolam (r(s) = 0.818 and 0.851, respectively; P < .01) in 10 different human liver microsomes.
In addition, there was a significantcorrelation between CIT N-demethylation and (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation (r(s) = 0.773, P < .05), although little inhibition was observed in the presence of anti-CYP2C antibodies or (S)-mephenytoin.
The percentage contributions of CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 to the overall N-demethylation of CIT in human liver microsomes were estimated using a relative activity factor; respective values of 70% and 7% were calculated for microsomes obtained from livers from putative extensive metabolizers for (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation.
These results suggest that CYP3A4 is the major isoenzyme and CYP2C19 is the minor form involved in the major metabolic pathway for CIT in human liver microsomes.
Anti-CYP3A antibodies and ketoconazole strongly inhibitedCIT N-demethylation.
cDNA-expressed CYP3A4 and CYP2C19catalyzedCIT N-demethylation, whereas no appreciable activities were observed for CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1.
Inhibition by omeprazole of proguanil metabolism: mechanism of the interaction in vitro and prediction of in vivo results from the in vitro experiments.
Both the antimalarial prodrug proguanil and the gastric proton pump inhibitoromeprazole are substrates for cytochrome P450 (CYP)2C19 and CYP3A.
However, the relative contribution of each enzyme to proguanil bioactivation to cycloguanil and to the metabolism of omeprazole, as well as their potential to interact, remains to be examined.
The bioactivation of proguanil to its active metabolite cycloguanil was studied in vitro in human liver microsomes and in vivo in 12 healthy subjects, in the absence and in the presence of omeprazole.
The formation of cycloguanil from proguanil exhibited biphasic kinetic behavior in four of six human livers, indicating that at least two enzymes are responsible for this metabolic step.
Cycloguanil formation activity did not correlate with immunoreactive CYP3A4 content or with CYP3A4 activity, as measured by testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation, suggesting that CYP3A4 plays a limited role in cycloguanil formation.
We conclude that in vitro studies of proguanilmetabolism and interactions are predictive of in vivo situations, that CYP2C19 is the main enzyme responsible for proguanil bioactivation to cycloguanil and that omeprazole inhibits this biotransformation in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting this enzyme.
Furthermore, troleandomycin (10 microM) inhibited only 10 to 17% of cycloguanil formation at proguanil concentrations of 100 and 500 microM.
At a proguanil concentration of 20 microM, omeprazole at 10 microM inhibited cycloguanil formation in vitro by 47 +/- 59%.
These in vitro results were consistent with the results of our in vivo study in healthy subjects, which showed a 32 +/- 11%decrease in proguanil apparent oral clearance and a 65 +/- 8%decrease in proguanil partial metabolic clearance to cycloguanil in the presence of omeprazole (both P < .001).
Variable contribution of cytochromes P450 2D6, 2C9 and 3A4 to the 4-hydroxylation of tamoxifen by human liver microsomes.
4-Hydroxylation is an important pathway of tamoxifenmetabolism because the product of this reaction is intrinsically 100 times more potent as an oestrogen receptor antagonist than is the parent drug.
Although tamoxifen 4-hydroxylation is catalysed by human cytochrome P450 (CYP), data conflict on the specific isoforms responsible.
The aim of this study was to define unequivocally the role of individual CYPs in the 4-hydroxylation of tamoxifen by human liver microsomes.
Microsomes from each of 10 human livers catalysed the reaction [range = 0.6-2.9 pmol/mg protein/min (1 microM substrate concentration) and 6-25 pmol/mg protein/min (18 microM)].
Three of the livers with the lowest tamoxifen 4-hydroxylation activity were from genetically poor metabolisers with respect to CYP2D6.
Recombinant human CYPs 2D6, 2C9 and 3A4 but not CYPs 1A1, 1A2, 2C19 and 2E1 displayed significant 4-hydroxylation activity.
However, the marked between-subject variation in the contribution of these isoforms underlines the need to study metabolic reactions in a sufficient number of livers that are characterised with respect to a range of cytochrome P450 activities.
Inhibition of activity by quinidine (1 microM), sulphaphenazole (20 microM) and ketoconazole (2 microM), selective inhibitors of CYPs 2D6, 2C9 and 3A4, respectively, was 0-80%, 0-80% and 12-57%.
The proportion of activity inhibited by quinidinecorrelated positively with total microsomal tamoxifen 4-hydroxylation activity (rs = 0.89, P < 0.01), indicating a major involvement of CYP2D6 in this reaction.
Similar inhibition and correlation experiments confirmed that tamoxifen N-demethylation is catalysed predominantly by CYP3A4.
These findings indicate that the 4-hydroxylation of tamoxifen is catalysed almost exclusively by CYPs 2D6, 2C9 and 3A4 in human liver microsomes.
Aryl acetylenes as mechanism-based inhibitors of cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenase enzymes.
Aryl acetylenes have been investigated as inhibitors of cytochrome P450 (P450)-dependent alkoxyresorufin dealkylation dealkylation activities in liver microsomes prepared from rats exposed to beta-naphthoflavone, Isosafrole, or phenobarbital.
Many of the acetylenes investigated produce pseudo-first-order time-dependent and NADPH-dependent losses of the dealkylation activities characteristic of mechanism-based irreversible inactivation (suicide inhibition).
Replacing the terminal hydrogen of aryl acetylenes with a methyl group to convert ethynes into propynes enhances the inhibition of P450 1A enzymes; in some instances, this modification converts a reversible inhibitor of P450s into a suicide inhibitor.
In contrast, ethynes are more effective suicide inhibitors of P450 2B-dependent dealkylations than the corresponding propynes.
Aryl acetylenes with an ethynyl group on the 2 position of naphthalene or on the 9 position of phenanthrene and arylalkyl acetylenes with alkyl chains containing 2, 3, or 4 methylene groups are selective inhibitors of P450 2B1/2B2 in liver microsomes from rats.
In agreement with previous reports [Yun, C.-H., Hammons, G. J., Jones, G., Martin, M. V., Hopkins, N. E., Alworth, W. L., and Guengerich, F. P. (1992) Biochemistry 31, 10556-10563],"
In the systems examined, the losses of P450-dependent activity produced by these aryl acetylenes were not accompanied by corresponding decreases in the measured P450 absorption spectra.
Thus P450 inactivation by these aryl acetylenes does not involve labeling and destruction of the heme.
Incubation of 4PBi with microsomal P450 1A1 or 1A2 from rat liver under conditions that lead to P450-dependent, enzyme inactivations generates a 2-biphenylylpropionic acid product.
This suggests that the suicide inhibition of P450s by propynylaryl acetylenes proceeds via a methylaryl ketene formed by a 1,2-methyl rearrangement, analogous to the mechanism of suicide inhibition by ethynyl acetylenes that proceed via ketene intermediates formed by 1,2-hydrogen shifts [Ortiz de Montellano, P. R., and Kunze, K. L.(1981) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 209, 710-712].
Aryl acetylenes also act as suicide inhibitors of P450 1A2 in human liver microsomes, of purified P450 1A2 from rabbit or rat liver in reconstituted systems, and of purified recombinant human P450 1A2 and 1A1 in reconstituted systems.
4-(1-Propynyl)biphenyl (4PBi) inactivated P450 1A2-dependent ethoxyresourfin deethylation (EROD) activity in human liver microsomes in an NADPH-dependent process (k(inactivation), 0.23 min-1; KI, 2.3 microM).
4PBi also inactivated purified recombinant human P450 1A2 (k(inactivation), 0.24 min-1; KI, 4.3 microM).
2-ethynylnaphthalene (2EN) was not a suicide inhibitor of the P450 1A2 activity in human liver microsomes but did inactivate purified human P450 1A2.
Neither 4PBi nor 2EN affected diagnostic activities of human microsomal P450 2E1, 2C9/10, 3A4, or 2C19.
Phenacetin O-deethylation by human liver microsomes in vitro: inhibition by chemical probes, SSRI antidepressants, nefazodone and venlafaxine.
Biotransformation of phenacetin via O-deethylation to acetaminophen, an index reaction reflecting activity of Cytochrome P450-1A2, was studied in microsomal preparations from a series of human livers.
Acetaminophenformation was consistent with a double Michaelis-Menten system, with low-Km (mean Km1 = 68 microM) and high-Km (mean Km2 = 7691 microM) components.
The low-K(m) enzyme accounted for an average of 96% of estimated ntrinsic clearancei, and was predicted to contribute more than 50% of net reaction velocity at phenacetin concentrations less than 2000 microM.
The other SSRIs were more than tenfold less potent.
The antidepressant nefazodone and four of its metabolites (meta-chloro-phenylpiperazine, two hydroxylated derivatives, and a triazoledione) were very weak inhibitors of P450-1A2.
Venlafaxine and its O- and N-desmethyl metabolites showed minimal inhibitory activity.
Among index inhibitor probes, alpha-naphthoflavone was a highly potent inhibitor of the low-Km enzyme (Ki1 = 0.013 microM); furafylline also was a moderately active inhibitor (Ki1 = 4.4 microM), but its inhibiting potency was increased by preincubation with microsomes.
Ketoconazole was a relatively weakinhibitor (Ki1 = 32 microM); quinidine and cimetidine showed minimal inhibiting activity.
Among six selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants, fluvoxamine was a potent inhibitor of 1A2 (mean Ki1 = 0.24 microM).
Mean Ki1 values were: fluoxetine, 4.4 microM; norfluoxetine, 15.9 microM; sertraline, 8.8 microM; desmethylsertraline, 9.5 microM; paroxetine, 5.5 microM.
CYP2D6 is the principal cytochrome P450 responsible for metabolism of the histamine H1 antagonist promethazine in human liver microsomes.
To determine which cytochrome P450 form is involved in the promethazine [10-(2-dimethylaminopropyl) phenothiazine] metabolism, in vitro analysis using human liver microsomes were performed.
Promethazine was mainly biotransformed to ring-hydroxylated, S-oxidized and N-demethylated metabolites.
Lineweaver-Burk plots for the hydroxylation, S-oxidation and N-demethylation indicated that the hydroxylation occurred with a low K(m) value in human liver microsomes.
Microsomes from genetically-engineered human B-lymphoblastoid cells expressing CYP2D6 hydroxylated promethazine most efficiently as compared to other P450 forms, indicating that it was the principal P450 responsible for the metabolism of promethazine in human liver microsomes.
The promethazine hydroxylase in human liver microsomes was inhibited by SKF-525A, propranolol, sparteine, quinidine and anti-CYP2D6 serum suggesting involvement of a P450 related to CYP2D6.
The inhibition of CYP2D6-catalysed bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase by various histamine H3 antagonists including promethazine suggested that promethazine and some other histamine H1 antagonists could be inhibitors of this P450 in human liver microsomes.
Inter-individual variability in the oxidation of 1,2-dibromoethane: use of heterologously expressed human cytochrome P450 and human liver microsomes.
1,2-Dibromoethane (1,2-DBE) is mainly used as an additive in leaded gasoline and as a soil fumigant and it is a suspected carcinogen in humans.
In this study, the oxidative bioactivation of 1,2-DBE to 2-bromoacetaldehyde (2-BA) was studied using heterologously expressed human cytochrome P450 (P450) isoenzymes and human liver microsomes.
Out of ten heterologously expressed human P450 isoenzymes (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2E1, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C18, CYP3A4 and CYP3A5), only human CYP2A6, CYP2B6 and CYP2E1metabolized 1,2-DBE, albeit with strongly differing catalytic efficiencies.
The apparent Km and Vmax values were 3.3 mM and 0.17 pmol/min per pmol P450 for CYP2A6, 9.7 mM and 3.18 pmol/min per pmol P450 for CYP2B6 and 42 microM and 1.3 pmol/min per pmol P450 for CYP2E1, respectively.
In all of 21 human liver samples studied, 1,2-DBE was oxidized with activities ranging from 22.2 to 1027.6 pmol/min per mg protein, thus showing a 46-fold inter-individual variability.
The kinetics of the oxidative metabolism of 1,2-DBE to 2-BA in human liver microsomes were linear, indicating the involvement of primarily one single P450 isoenzyme.
There was a tendency towards a positive correlation between the oxidative metabolism of 1,2-DBE in the human liver microsomes and the 6-hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone, a selective substrate for CYP2E1.
Furthermore, the oxidative metabolism of 1,2-DBE was inhibited by the specific CYP2E1inhibitorsdisulfiram (DS) and diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC).
In contrast, a poor correlation was found between the immunochemically quantified amount of CYP2E1 and the microsomal chlorzoxazone 6-hydroxylation or the 1,2-DBE oxidation.
The results indicate that CYP2E1 is probably the major P450 isoenzyme involved in the oxidative hepatic metabolism of 1,2-DBE in humans.
The inter-individual variability in the oxidative bioactivation of 1,2-DBE in humans, largely due to inter-individual variability in the catalytic activity of hepatic CYP2E1, may have important consequences for the risk assessment for human exposure to 1,2-DBE.
()
Human reductive halothane metabolism in vitro is catalyzed by cytochrome P450 2A6 and 3A4.
The anesthetic halothane undergoes extensive oxidative and reductive biotransformation, resulting in metabolites that cause hepatotoxicity.
Halothane is reduced anaerobically by cytochrome P450 (P450) to the volatile metabolites 2-chloro-1,1-difluoroethene (CDE) and 2-chloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane (CTE).
The purpose of this investigation was to identify the human P450 isoform(s) responsible for reductive halothanemetabolism.
CDE and  mation from halothane metabolism by human liver microsomes was determined by GC/MS analysis.
Eadie-Hofstee plots of both CDE and CTE formation were nonlinear, suggesting multiple P450 isoform involvement.
This investigation demonstrated that human liver microsomal reductive halothane metabolism is catalyzed predominantly by P450 2A6 and 3A4.
This isoform selectivity for anaerobic halothanemetabolism contrasts with that for oxidative human halothane metabolism, which is catalyzed predominantly by P450 2E1.
Halothane metabolism to CDE and CTE under reductive conditions was completely inhibited by carbon monoxide, which implicates exclusively P450 in this reaction.
Microsomal CDE and CTE formation were each inhibited40-50% by P450 2A6-selective inhibitors (coumarin and 8-methoxypsoralen) and 55-60% by P450 3A4-selective inhibitors (ketoconazole and troleandomycin).
P450 1A-, 2B6-, 2C9/10-, and 2D6-selective inhibitors (7,8-benzoflavone, furafylline, orphenadrine, sulfaphenazole, and quinidine) had no significant effect on reductive halothane metabolism.
Measurement of product formationcatalyzed by a panel of cDNA-expressed P450 isoforms revealed that maximal rates of CDEformation occurred with P450 2A6, followed by P450 3A4.
P450 3A4 was the most effective catalyst of CTE formation.
Among a panel of 11 different human livers, there were significant linear correlations between the rate of CDEformation and both 2A6 activity ( r = 0.64, p < 0.04) and 3A4 activity (r = 0.64, p < 0.03).
Similarly, there were significant linear correlations between CTE formation and both 2A6 activity (r = 0.55, p < 0.08) and 3A4 activity (r = 0.77, p < 0.005).
The P450 2E1inhibitors 4-methylpyrazole and diethyldithiocarbamate inhibitedCDE and CTE formation by 20-45% and 40-50%, respectively; however, cDNA-expressed P450 2E1 did not catalyze significant amounts of CDE or CTE production, and microsomal metabolite formation was not correlated with P450 2E1 activity.
Identification of human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms involved in the in vitro metabolism of cyclobenzaprine.
Cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril) is a muscle relaxant, possessing a tricyclic structure.
Numerous therapeutic agents containing this structure are known to be metabolized by polymorphic cytochrome P4502D6.
The aim of this study was to determine if cytochrome P4502D6 and other isoforms are involved in the metabolism of cyclobenzaprine in human liver microsomes.
When a panel of microsomes prepared from human B-lymphoblastoid cells that expressed specific human cytochrome P450 isoforms were used, only microsomes containing cytochromes P4501A2, 2D6, and 3A4catalyzed N-demethylation.
In addition, demethylation catalyzed by these recombinant cytochromes P450 can be completely inhibited with selective inhibitors at concentrations as low as 1 to 20 microM.
To further determine the involvement of cytochrome P4502D6 in cyclobenzaprinemetabolism, liver microsomes from a human that lacked CYP2D6 enzyme activities was included in this study.
The data showed that cyclobenzaprine N-demethylation still occurred in the incubation with this microsome.
These results suggested that cytochrome P4502D6 plays only a minor role in cyclobenzaprine N-demethylation whereas 3A4 and 1A2 are primarily responsible for cyclobenzaprinemetabolism in human liver microsomes.
Due to the minimum involvement of CYP2D6 in the vitro metabolism of cyclobenzaprine, the polymorphism of cytochrome P4502D6 in man should not be of muci concern in the clinical use of cyclobenzaprine.
Selective cytochrome P450 inhibitors for CYP1A1/2 (furafylline and 7,8-benzoflavone) and CYP3A4 (troleandomycin, gestodene, and ketoconazole) inhibited the formation of desmethylcyclobenzaprine, a major metabolite of cyclobenzaprine, in human liver microsomes.
Antibodies directed against CYP1A1/2 and CYP3A4 inhibited the demethylation reaction whereas anti-human CYP2C9/10, CYP2C19, and CYP2E1 antibodies did not show any inhibitory effects.
Interestingly, cyclobenzaprine N-demethylation was significantlycorrelated with caffeine 3-demethylation (1A2) and testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation (3A4) but not with dextromethorphan O-demethylation (2D6) in human liver microsomes.
Microsomal codeine N-demethylation: cosegregation with cytochrome P4503A4 activity.
Codeine is metabolized by glucuronidation, by O-demethylation to morphine, and by N-demethylation to norcodeine.
The enzyme responsible for the O-demethylation to morphine has been identified as cytochrome P4502D6 (CYP2D6).
The purpose of the present study was to identify the specific P450 enzyme responsible for codeine N-demethylation.
Microsomal preparations (250 pmol of P450) obtained from 12 human liver donors were incubated with 20 microM codeine and analyzed for norcodeineformation.
Additionally, significant norcodeine production was observed with purified CYP3A4 derived from human liver microsomes.
In conclusion, codeine N-demethylation activity cosegregates with CYP3A4 activity.
Codeine N-demethylation activity was linearly correlated with nifedipine oxidation activity (r = 0.90, p < 0.001), a marker of CYP3A4, but not with codeine O-demethylation, a marker of CYP2D6.
Preincubation with troleandomycin (50 microM), or gestodene (50 microM) inhibitors of CYP3A4, decreased the rate of production of norcodeine by 60 and 45% compared to control values, respectively.
Similarly, ketoconazole (10 microM) and erythromycin (10 microM) inhibitedcodeine N-demethylation by 75 and 35%, respectively.
In contrast, the presence of quinidine, sulfaphenazole, or diethyldithiocarbamate in the incubation mixture had no effect on norcodeineformation.
Preincubation with antibodies raised to CYP3A4 (5 mg lgG/nmol P450) caused 96% inhibition of norcodeine production, whereas preimmune IgG or antibodies raised to CYP2A6 and CYP2C had no effect.
Coadministration of codeine with selective inhibitors of CYP3A4may result in increasedmorphine production and enhanced pharmacodynamic effects due to shunting down the CYP2D6 pathway.
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is N-demethylated by cytochromes P450 2D6, 1A2 and 3A4--implications for susceptibility to Parkinson's disease.
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) induces a Parkinson-like syndrome through biotransformation by monoamine oxidase B to the neurotoxic metabolite 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridine.
Neuroprotection may be provided by parallel N-demethylation and N-oxidation pathways mediated by the microsomal cytochrome P450 and flavin monooxygenase systems, respectively.
The aims of this study were to characterise the N-demethylation of MPTP by human liver microsomes over a wide range of concentrations, and to identify the cytochrome P450 enzymes involved in this reaction.
The kinetics of the N-demethylation of MPTP (1 microM - 3 mM) by microsomes from the liver of an extensive metabolizer with respect to cytochrome P4502D6 (CYP2D6) activity were biphasic (apparent Km1 and Km2 values = 48 and 2882 microM).
The high affinity activity was abolished in the presence of quinidine (1 microM) and was absent in microsomes from a genotypically poor metabolizer with respect to CYP2D6.
Yeast microsomes containing heterologously expressed CYP2D6 N-demethylated MPTP (Km = 39 microM), and there was a high correlation between the quinidine-inhibitable N-demethylation of MPTP (50 microM) (0.7-91%, mean 44%, of total activity) and the alpha-hydroxylation of metoprolol in microsomes from 11 human livers (rs = 0.92; P < .001).
At 50 microM MPTP, N-demethylase activity in human liver microsomes was also inhibited by furafylline (10 microM) and ketoconazole (2 microM) (mean inhibition39 and 13%, respectively; n = 11 livers).
Yeast microsomes containing heterologously expressed human CYP1A2 N-demethylated MPTP with a Km of 2246 microM.
These findings indicate that CYP2D6, CYP1A2 and, to a lesser extent CYP3A4, may have a role in protecting against Parkinson's disease induced by MPTP and other potential environmental neurotoxins.
The data provide some biochemical support for the proposition that genotypically poor metabolizers with respect to CYP2D6 are overrepresented in some populations of Parkinson's patients, and that smokers (induced CYP1A2?)"
are underrepresented.
()
Use of electrospray ionization liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to study the role of CYP2D6 in the in vitro metabolism of 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonists.
An electrospray ionization liquid chromatographic-mass spectrometric (ESI-LC-MS) method has been developed to study the involvement of the cytochrome P450 isoenzyme CYP2D6 in the in vitro metabolism of the indole containing 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT(3)++) receptor antagonists tropisetron, ondansetron and dolasetron in human liver microsomes.
Compounds were eluted using linear gradients of acetonitrile-20 mM ammonium acetate, solvent A, (10:90, v/v) (pH 6.0) and solvent B, (60:40, v/v) (pH 6.0) and a Nucleosil C(4) column.
Microsomal incubations were analysed using selected ion monitoring of the molecular ion of parent drug and the molecular ion of hydroxylated metabolites.
The involvement of CYP2D6 in drug metabolism was assessed by inhibition studies using quinidine (5 mu M), a specific inhibitor of human CYP2D6, as well as by incubating compounds with microsomes prepared from cells transfected with cDNA encoding human CYP2D6.
The present method can be applied to pre-clinical compounds, at an early stage of drug discovery, to assess the involvement of CYP2D6 in their metabolism and to screen for those compounds where CYP2D6 is the only isoenzyme implicated in the formation of major metabolites.
Results showed that the oxidation of all three compounds involved CYP2D6, but only that of tropisetron was inhibited by over 90% in the presence of quinidine.
Metabolism of the new immunosuppressor cyclosporin G by human liver cytochromes P450.
Cyclosporin G is a new immunosuppressor structurally similar to cyclosporin A. "
Although this drug is pharmacologically as active as cyclosporin A, it is less toxic, in particular at the kidney level.
We conclude that CYP3A4 is the major enzyme involved in the oxidative metabolism of cyclosporin G in human liver.
The aim of this work was to identify the enzyme system(s) involved in the oxidative metabolism of cyclosporin G in man: (1) in a bank of human liver microsomes (n = 22), cyclosporin G oxidase activity correlatedsignificantly with cyclosporin A oxidase activity (P < 0.0001) and with the level of CYP3A4 (P < 0.002), determined by immunoblot; (2) specific inhibitors of CYP3A4, troleandomycin, and ketoconazole, inhibitedcyclosporin G oxidase activity by more than 80%; (3) antiCYP3A4 antibodies specifically inhibited this activity by nearly 90%; (4) cyclosporin A was a competitive inhibitor of cyclosporin G oxidase and vice versa; (5). Among a battery of cDNA-expressed CYPs, only CYP3A4 was able to generate detectable amounts of metabolites of cyclosporin G and cyclosporin A with a turnover number close to that calculated from experiments with liver microsomes; (6) in human hepatocytes in culture, pretreatment of cells with rifampicin and phenobarbital, 2 inducers of CYP3A4, produced a greatincrease in cyclosporin G oxidase activity, while beta-naphthoflavone, an inducer of CYP1As, did not.
In vitro interaction of the antipsychotic agent olanzapine with human cytochromes P450 CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A.
1.
The ability of olanzapine to inhibit the metabolism of marker catalytic activities for the cytochromes P450 CYP3A, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 was examined.
This inhibitory capability was compared with that obtained with clozapine and known inhibitory compounds for the same cytochromes P450.
2.
3.
Total olanzapine vs unbound olanzapine was used to model the worst case (most conservative) situation.
In all cases, the calculated percent inhibition of these cytochromes P450 by olanzapine was < 0.3%, suggesting that there would be little in vivo inhibition of the metabolism of substrates of these enzymes when co-administered with olanzapine.
Olanzapine, clozapine, and ketoconazole were all found to non-competitively inhibit 1'-hydroxy midazolamformation, form selective for CYP3A, yielding Ki values of 491, 99 and 0.11 microM, respectively.
The 1'-hydroxylation of bufuralol, form selective for CYP2D6, was competitively inhibited by olanzapine (Ki = 89 microM), clozapine (Ki = 19 microM), and quinidine (Ki = 0.03 microM).
Tolbutamidemetabolism to 4-hydroxy tolbutamide, form selective for CYP2C9, was competitively inhibited by clozapine and phenytoin (Ki of 31 microM and 17 microM, respectively).
Olanzapine non-competitively inhibitedtolbutamidemetabolism with a Ki of 715 microM.
The marker catalytic activity for CYP2C19 mediated metabolism, 4'-hydroxy S-mephenytoinformation, was competitively inhibited by clozapine (Ki = 69 microM) and omeprazole (Ki = 4.1 microM).
Non-competitive inhibition of CYP2C19 mediated metabolism was seen with olanzapine with a Ki of 920 microM.
The calculated percent inhibition by olanzapine of substrates metabolized by CYP3A, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 was modeled assuming a total plasma concentration in the therapeutic range (0.2 microM).
Role of cytochrome P450 3A4 in human metabolism of MK-639, a potent human immunodeficiency virus protease inhibitor.
MK-639 (L-735,524) is a potent human immunodeficiency virus protease inhibitor under investigation in the treatment of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Five in vitro approaches have been used to identify the cytochrome P450 isoform(s) responsible for the human microsomal oxidative metabolism of MK-639.
These approaches are: 1) chemical inhibition; 2) immunochemical inhibition; 3) metabolism by cDNA-expressed human cytochrome P450 enzymes; 4) a correlation analysis; and 5) competitive inhibition of marker activities.
This suggested the involvement of CYP3A4 in MK-639metabolism.
Human recombinant CYP3A4 showed a high metabolic activity to form all MK-639 metabolites found in native human liver microsomes.
In addition, the formation of individual MK-639 metabolites correlated well with each other and with testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation in 12 different human liver microsomes, whereas no correlation was observed between MK-639 metabolite formation and bufuralol 1'-hydroxylation (or tolbutamide methyl hydroxylation).
Collectively, these results consistently indicate that CYP3A4 is the isoform responsible for the oxidative metabolism of MK-639 in human liver microsomes.
Ketoconazole and troleandomycin, both selective inhibitors for cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), markedly inhibited the formation of all oxidative metabolites of MK-639; whereas other inhibitors (furafylline, sulfaphenazole, quinidine, S-mephenytoin, and diethyldithiocarbamate) had little effect on MK-639metabolism.
Consistent with this, an anti-rat CYP3A1 rabbit polyclonal antibody, which shows a cross-reactive inhibition of CYP3A4-dependent testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation in human liver microsomes, completely inhibited MK-639 metabolism.
Furthermore, MK-639strongly inhibitedtestosterone 6beta-hydroxylation in a concentration-dependent manner.
Kinetic analysis showed that MK-639 is a very potent competitive inhibitor for testosterone 6beta-hydroxylation, with a Ki value of approximately 0.5 mu M. ")
Induction of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes in cultured precision-cut rat and human liver slices.
1.
The effect of some xenobiotics on levels of selected cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzymes determined by Western immunoblotting and associated enzyme activities has been studied in 72-h cultured rat and human precision-cut liver slices.
2.
In cultured rat liver slices, 0.5 mM sodium phenobarbitone (PB), 25 microMbeta-naphthoflavone (BNF), and 20 micrograms/mlAroclor 1254 (ARO)induced mixed-function oxidase enzyme activities.
Western immunoblotting of liver slice microsomes was performed with antibodies to rat CYP1A2, 2B1/2 and 3A.
Compared with 72-h control (dimethyl sulphoxide only treated) rat liver slice microsomes, PB inducedCYP2B1/2 and 3A, BNF inducedCYP1A2, and AROinducedCYP1A2, 2B1/2, and 3A.
3.
The peroxisome proliferators methylclofenapate (MCP), ciprofibrate (CIP) and Wy-14,643 (WY)induced palmitoyl-CoA oxidation in 72-h cultured rat liver slices.
Compared with 72-h control rat liver slice microsomes, MCP, CIP, and WY all induced levels of CYP4A.
4.
Further studies would be required to confirm that CYP4A isoenzymes could be induced by xenobiotics in human liver slices.
5.
These results demonstrate that cultured liver slices may be used in evaluating the effect of xenobiotics on both rat and human CYP isoenzymes.
In cultured human liver slices, 20 micrograms/ml ARO, but not 0.5 mM MCP, induced 7-Ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase activity.
NeitherAROnorMCP had any effect on homogenate palmitoyl-CoA oxidation and microsomal lauric acid 11- and 12-hydroxylase activities.
Compared with 72-h control human liver slice microsomes, AROinducedCYP1A2, and MCP appeared to induce CYP4A.
In vitro comparative inhibition profiles of major human drug metabolising cytochrome P450 isozymes (CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4) by HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors.
The affinity of (+)-, (-)- and (+/-)- fluvastatin, a new synthetic HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor developed as a racemate, for specific human P450 monooxygenases in liver microsomes was compared with that of the pharmacologically active acidic forms of lovastatin, pravastatin and simvastatin.
Affinity was determined as the inhibitory potency for prototype reactions for 3 major drug metabolising enzymes: diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation (CYP2C9), dextromethorphan O-demethylation (CYP2D6), and midazolam 1'-hydroxylation (CYP3A4).
As already reported for lovastatin and simvastatin, in vivo drug interactions by inhibition of liver oxidation of CYP2C9 substrates (e.g. hypoglyceamic sulphonylureas and oral anticoagulants) may be expected.
Lovastatin acid, pravastatin and simvastatin acid displayed moderate affinity for all three P450 isozymes (estimated Ki> 50 micromol.1(-1)).
Racemic and (+)- and (-)-fluvastatin showed moderate affinity (estimated Ki> 50 micromol.1(-1)) for CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, whereas their affinity for CYP2C9 was high (estimated Ki< 1 micromol.1(-1)).
Diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation was competitively and stereoselectively inhibited, with measured Ki's of 0.06 and 0.28 micromol.1(-1) for (+)- and (-)- fluvastatin, respectively.
Fluvastatin selectively inhibits a major drug metabolising enzyme (CYP2C9), the (+)-isomer (pharmacologically more active) showing 4-5 fold higher affinity.
Potent and selective inactivation of human liver microsomal cytochrome P-450 isoforms by L-754,394, an investigational human immune deficiency virus protease inhibitor.
L-754,394, N- [2(R)-hydroxy-1(S)-indanyl]-5- [2(S)-(1,1-dimethylethylaminocarbonyl)-4- [(furo [2,3-b]pyridin-5-yl)methyl]piperazin-1-yl]-4(S)-hydroxy-2(R) - phenylmethylpentanamide, is a potent and specific inhibitor of the human immune deficiency virus (HIV) protease.
Thus, for testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase, the inactivation kinetic constants, Kl and kinact, were 7.5 microM and 1.62 min-1, respectively, and the partition ratio (moles product formed per moles enzyme inactivated) was approximately 1.35.
However, exogenously added nucleophiles (GSH, semicarbazide and N-acetylcysteine) failed to protect against P-450 inactivation.
These results suggest that the inactivation process likely is mediated by a reactive metabolite of L-754,394 that alkylates, and thereby destroys, the enzyme.
Furthermore, this electrophilic intermediate may not be released into the medium before the inactivation event.
The drug selectively inhibited human liver microsomal CYP 3A4-dependent testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase and CYP 2D6-dependent bufuralol 1'-hydroxylase activities in a time- and concentration-dependent manner in the presence of an NADPH-generating system.
L-754,394 was found to be a very potent inactivator of CYP 3A4.
To a lesser extent, L-754,394 also was an inactivator of CYP 2D6, for which the corresponding values for Kl, kinact and partition ratio were 32 microM, 0.18 min-1 and 40, respectively.
CYP 3A4inactivation was reduced markedly by ketoconazole, a selective CYP 3A4 inhibitor.
Similarly, CYP 2D6inactivation also was prevented by quinidine, a specific competitive inhibitor of this isoform.
Validation of the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid as an in vitro substrate probe for human liver CYP2E1.
The (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid (11-OH-LA), a model substrate of fatty acids, was previously shown to be due to CYP2E1 in rat liver microsomes.
The present study examined changes in hepatic CYP2E1 content and 11-OH-LA in a panel of 29 human liver microsomes.
The 11-OH-LA activity was strongly correlated with the CYP2E1 content, quantitated by immunoblot (r = 0.75) and with four monooxygenase activities known to be mediated by CYP2E1: chlorzoxazone-6-hydroxylation (r = 0.73), 4-nitrophenol hydroxylation (r = 0.84), N-nitrosodimethylamine demethylation (r = 0.79) and n-butanol oxidation (r = 0.73).
The weak value of ethanolKi on the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid suggested that low levels of alcohol could modify fatty acid metabolism in the liver.
Polyclonal antibody directed against rat CYP2E1inhibited the formation of 11-OH-LA without affecting 12-OH-LA activity.
Taken together, these results suggest that CYP2E1 is involved in the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid in human liver microsomes, and omega-hydroxylation is mediated by another enzyme.
Finally, the use of yeasts and mammalian cells genetically engineered for expression of 9 human P450s demonstrated that CYP2E1 was the one enzyme involved in the (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid.
The (omega-1)-hydroxylation of lauric acid was inhibited by ethanol (Ki = 3.5 mM), acetone (IC50 = 10 mM) dimethylsulfoxide, chlorzoxazone (competitive inhibitors of CYP2E1), diethyldithiocarbamate, and diallylsulfide (both selective mechanism-based inactivators of CYP2E1).
Furafylline and gestodene, suicide substrates of CYP1A and CYP3A4, respectively, did not modify the 11-hydroxylation of lauric acid.
The effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and their metabolites on S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase activity in human liver microsomes.
The inhibitory effects of four selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine and citalopram, and three metabolites (norfluoxetine, demethylcitalopram and didemethylcitalopram), on S-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation activities in human liver microsomes were studied.
The findings suggest that some SSRIs and their metabolites with a low Ki value (e.g., fluoxetine, norfluoxetine) may reduce the clearance of drugs metabolized by this isoform of P450, thereby resulting in a possible drug-drug interaction, when administered simultaneously.
In addition, SSRIs and their metabolites examined herein may be substrates toward CYP2C19.
The 4'-hydroxylation of S-mephenytoin, a representative substrate toward CYP2C19, was competitively inhibited by all the SSRIs and their metabolites studied.
The mean Ki values of fluoxetine, norfluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine, citalopram, demethylcitalopram and didemethylcitalopram were 5.2, 1.1, 2.0, 7.5, 87.3, 55.8 and 7.7 microM, respectively.
N-demethylation of amitriptyline in vitro: role of cytochrome P-450 3A (CYP3A) isoforms and effect of metabolic inhibitors.
Biotransformation of amitriptyline (AMI) to its demethylated product nortriptyline (NT) was studied in vitro with human liver microsomes from four different donors, preselected to reflect a range of metabolic rates.
Reaction velocity versus substrate concentration was consistent with a sigmoid Vmax model.
Vmax varied from 0.42 to 3.42 nmol/mg/min, Km from 33 to 89 microM AMI.
A polyclonal rabbit antibody against rat liver CYP3A1, in antibody/microsomal protein ratios varying from 1:1 to 10:1, inhibited N-demethylation of AMI to an asymptotic maximum of 60%.
These results are consistent with several case reports describing impairment of AMI metabolism by SSRIs.
Inhibition of AMI demethylation by low concentrations of ketoconazole and by anti-3A antibody supports an important role for CYP3A isoforms in mediating this reaction.
Ketoconazole was a highly potent inhibitor of N-demethylation, with a mean Ki value of 0.11 +/- 0.013 microM (+/- S.D.), whereas quinidine (up to 50 microM), a CYP2D6 inhibitor, and alpha-naphthoflavone (up to 5 microM), a CYP1A2inhibitor only at low concentrations, showed no effect.
All selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) tested had an inhibitory effect on the formation of NT, with mean Ki values of 4.37 (+/- 3.38) microM for sertraline, 5.46 (+/- 1.95) microM for desmethylsertraline, 9.22 (+/- 3.69) microM for fluvoxamine, 12.26 (+/- 5.67) microM for norfluoxetine, 15.76 (+/- 5.05) microM for paroxetine, and 43.55 (+/- 18.28) microM for fluoxetine.
Human liver oxidative metabolism of O6-benzylguanine.
The oxidation of O6-benzylguanine, an inactivator of O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase, was examined using human liver cytosol, microsomes, and several P450 isoforms.
Inhibition by allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, was less dramatic.
Human P450s CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4 expressed in Hep G2 hepatoma cells using vaccinia virus vectors were incubated with 10 or 200 microMO6-benzylguanine.
However, an appreciable increase in CYP3A4 contribution was noted at 200 microM.
CYP1A2 exhibited a more than 200-fold higher relative catalytic activity (Vmax/Km) compared with CYP3A4.
However, one would expect interindividual variation in the extent of oxidation of O6-benzylguanine depending on the levels of aldehyde oxidase, CYP1A2, and CYP3A4.
Incubation of O6-benzylguanine with human liver cytosol resulted in the formation of O6-benzyl-8-oxoguanine, which was inhibited by menadione, a potent inhibitor of aldehyde oxidase.
Oxidation of O6-benzylguanine also occurred with pooled human liver microsomes and was inhibited by both furafylline and troleandomycin, selective inhibitors of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, respectively.
At 10 microM, O6-benzylguanine was oxidized primarily by CYP1A2 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A4.
Therefore, at therapeutically relevant concentrations of O6-benzylguanine, CYP1A2 could be primarily involved in its oxidation since it shows a much lower Km value (1.3 microM) than CYP3A4 (52.2 microM) and cytosol (81.5 microM).
An investigation of the interaction between halofantrine, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4: studies with human liver microsomes and heterologous enzyme expression systems.
1.
We have assessed the interaction of the antimalarial halofantrine with cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in vitro, with the use of microsomes from human liver and recombinant cell lines.
2.
Of a group of structurally related antimalarials tested, only quinidine (IC50 = 0.04 microM) was more potent.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that halofantrine is a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6 in vitro and can also be metabolised by the enzyme.
However, in human liver microsomes it appears to be metabolised largely by CYP3A4.
Rac-halofantrine was a potent inhibitor (IC50 = 1.06 microM, Ki = 4.3 microM) of the 1-hydroxylation of bufuralol, a marker for CYP2D6 activity.
Microsomes prepared from recombinant CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 cell lines were shown to catalysehalofantrine N-debutylation.
The metabolism of halofantrine to its N-desbutyl metabolite by human liver microsomes showed no correlation with CYP2D6 genotypic or phenotypic status and there was no consistent inhibition by quinidine.
The rate of halofantrinemetabolism showed a significantcorrelation with both CYP3A4 protein levels (r = 0.88, P = 0.01) and the rate of felodipinemetabolism (r = 0.86, P = 0.013), a marker substrate for CYP3A4 activity.
Inhibition studies showed that ketoconazole is a potent inhibitor of halofantrinemetabolism (IC50 = 1.57 microM).
Oxidative metabolism of lansoprazole by human liver cytochromes P450.
The aim of this work was to identify the form(s) of human cytochrome P450 (P450) involved in the hepatic biotransformation of lansoprazole to its two main metabolites, i.e., the sulfone and the hydroxy derivative.
In liver microsomes, the production of the sulfone of lansoprazole correlated with the level of P450 3A4, cyclosporin oxidase, and the production of the hydroxy derivative, as well as of omeprazole sulfone.
The production of hydroxylansoprazole moderately correlated with the level of P450 3A4, cyclosporin oxidase, and (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase.
Among several forms of cDNA-expressed human P450s, 3A4 generated significant amounts of the sulfones of lansoprazole and omeprazole and 2C18 was active for the production of hydroxylansoprazole but inactive in the 4'-hydroxylation of (S)-mephenytoin.
We conclude that P450 3A4 is the major enzyme involved in the production of the sulfone of lansoprazole and that this P450, as well as P450 2C18 and/or another 2C-related form, could contribute to the production of hydroxylansoprazole.
The production of the sulfone and of the hydroxy derivative of lansoprazole was significantly inhibited by anti-P450 3A4 antibodies, by cyclosporin and ketoconazole, and by tolbutamide.
Anti-P450 2C8 and 2C3 antibodies moderately inhibited the biotransformation of lansoprazole, whereas they completely inhibited (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylase activity under the same conditions.
In primary cultures of human hepatocytes, the biotransformation of lansoprazole and the oxidation of cyclosporin were strongly increased by rifampicin and phenobarbital, whereas (S)-mephenytoin 4'-hydroxylation was not.
beta-Naphthoflavone did not induce the formation of the sulfones but stimulated the production of hydroxylansoprazole.
Biotransformation of losartan to its active carboxylic acid metabolite in human liver microsomes. Role of cytochrome P4502C and 3A subfamily members.
Losartan is a 4-chloro-5-hydroxymethylimidazole derivative that is a potent and highly selective angiotensin II receptor antagonist.
Losartan is metabolized in vivo in rats, monkeys, and humans to a carboxylic acid derivative E3174 that is pharmacologically more active than the parent compound.
We have investigated the mechanism of this biotransformation in human liver preparations.
The oxidation of both losartan and the putative aldehyde intermediate E3179 was catalyzed by the microsomal fraction, required both NADPH and molecular oxygen, and was inhibited by SKF 525-A, implicating cytochrome P450 (CYP).
When incubations with each substrate were performed under an atmosphere of 18O2, the extent of 18O incorporation into the carboxylic acid product was consistent with a mechanism for losartanoxidation involving an aldehyde intermediate.
To substantiate the involvement of CYP in these reactions, incubations with losartan and the aldehyde E3179 were performed in the presence of isoform-selective inhibitors.
These studies support the hypothesis that the aldehyde E3179 is an intermediate in the oxidation of losartan and that this two-step reaction is catalyzed in human liver microsomes by members of the CYP3A and CYP2C subfamilies.
Inhibitors of CYP3A4/5 (gestodene and ketoconazole) and CYP2C9/10 (sulfaphenazole) attenuated the oxidation of both substrates.
It was then demonstrated that microsomes containing either recombinant human liver CYP2C9 or CYP3A4 were capable of oxidizing both losartan and the aldehyde E3179 to the carboxylic acid E3174.
Subsequently, it was shown that rabbit anti-CYP2C9 and anti-CYP3A3/4 inhibited the oxidation of losartan to E3174 in incubations with human liver microsomes.
Evidence for a role of cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 in ethylmorphine metabolism.
Ethylmorphine is metabolised by N-demethylation (to norethylmorphine) and by O-deethylation (to morphine).
The O-deethylation reaction was previously shown in vivo to co-segregate with the O-demethylation of dextromethorphan indicating that ethylmorphine is a substrate of polymorphic cytochrome P450(CYP)2D6.
To study further the features of ethylmorphine metabolism we investigated its N-demethylation and O-deethylation in human liver microsomes from eight extensive (EM) and one poor metaboliser (PM) of dextromethorphan.
Whereas N-demethylation varied only two-fold there was a 4.3-fold variation in the O-deethylation of ethylmorphine, the lowest rate being observed in the PM.
Quinidine, at a concentration of 1 microM, inhibited O-deethylation in microsomes from an EM, but was unable to do so in microsomes from the PM.
The immunoidentified CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 correlated with the rates of O-deethylation (r = 0.972) and N-demethylation (r = 0.969), respectively.
We conclude that the O-deethylation of ethylmorphine is catalysed by the CYP2D6 in human liver microsomes consistent with previous findings in healthy volunteers.
Budesonide is metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) enzymes in human liver.
Budesonide is a synthetic glucocorticosteroid that is commonly used in topical treatment of asthma and rhinitis.
The main metabolites formed from budesonide in human liver microsomes have been identified as 16 alpha-hydroxyprednisolone and 6 beta-hydroxy-budesonide.
Although it is apparent that the cytochrome P450 (CYP) system is involved, the actual subfamily has not been identified.
In attempts to do this, budesonide was incubated with microsomes from ten different human liver samples where various CYP activities had been rank ordered.
We found a strong correlation between formation of the two main metabolites and testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylation (correlation 0.98 and 0.95), a marker for CYP3A.
When budesonide (10 microM) was incubated with human liver microsomes in the presence of compounds known to interact with different isoforms or subfamilies of CYP, ketoconazole was found to be the strongest inhibitor of budesonidemetabolism (IC50: approximately 0.1 microM) followed by troleandomycin (IC50: approximately 1 microM), erythromycin, and cyclosporin, all substances known to interact with CYP3A isoenzymes.
Substances known to interact with CYP2C (sulfaphenazole, mephenytoin, and tolbutamide) and with CYP2D6 (bufuralol and quinidine) did not specifically inhibit the metabolism of budesonide.
In addition, formation of the budesonide metabolites (16 alpha-hydroxyprednisolone and 6 beta-hydroxybudesonide) was inhibited by antibodies against the CYP3A subfamily, but not by antibodies against the CYP1A subfamily or control immunoglobulin G. We conclude that the formation of 16 alpha-hydroxyprednisolone and 6 beta-hydroxybudesonide from budesonide is catalyzed by isoenzymes within the CYP3A subfamily.
Involvement of a cytochrome P4502D subfamily in human liver microsomal bunitrolol 4-hydroxylation.
The oxidative metabolism of bunitrolol, an adrenergic beta-receptor antagonist was examined in human liver microsomes fortified with an NADPH-generating system.
These results suggest that CYP2D6 is involved in the bunitrolol 4-hydroxylase activity in human liver microsomes.
The microsomal fractions (n = 11) showed bunitrolol 4-hydroxylase activities, which correlated well with CYP2D6 contents (correlation coefficient, r = 0.854), debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase (r = 0.953) and imipramine 2-hydroxylase (r = 0.976) activities.
On the other hand, the bunitrolol 4-hydroxylase activity showed relatively poor correlations with CYP3A4 content (r = 0.552) and testosterone 6 beta-hydroxylase activity (r = 0.668).
The bunitrolol 4-hydroxylase activity was significantly inhibited by quinidine, a selective inhibitor for CYP2D6.
Polyclonal antibodies raised against rat liver microsomal cytochrome P450BTL, which is thought to belong to the CYP2D subfamily, effectively inhibitedbunitrolol 4-hydroxylation.
In contrast, polyclonal antibodies raised against human liver microsomal CYP3A4 did not show any inhibitory effect on the activity.
Caffeinemetabolism by human hepatic cytochromes P450: contributions of 1A2, 2E1 and 3A isoforms.
Caffeine (CA) N1-, N3- and N7-demethylase, CA 8-hydroxylase and phenacetin O-deethylase activities were measured in microsomes from 18 separate human livers which had been characterized previously for a range of cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoform-specific activities and immunoreactive CYP protein contents.
Correlations between the high affinity components of the three separate CA N-demethylations were highly significant (r = 0.77-0.91, P < 0.001) and each of the three high affinity CA N-demethylations correlatedsignificantly (r = 0.64-0.93, P < 0.05-0.001) with the high affinity phenacetin O-deethylase, 2-acetylaminofluorene N-hydroxylation and 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo [4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) and 2-amino-3-methylimidazo [4,5-f]quinoline (IQ) mutagenicity (all predominantly CYP1A2-mediated reactions).
The low affinity components of CA N1- and N7-demethylation correlatedsignificantly (r = 0.55-0.85, P < 0.05-0.001) with immunoreactive CYP2E1 content and the CYP2E1-specific activities 4-nitrophenol and chlorzoxazone hydroxylation.
The apparent Km values for CA N1- and N7-demethylation by cDNA-expressed CYP2E1 (namely 28 and 43 mM, respectively) were of a similar order to those calculated for the low affinity microsomal activities.
Effects of alpha-naphthoflavone, erythromycin, troleandomycin and nifedipine on microsomal CA 8-hydroxylation were generally consistent with CYP3A involvement.
Taken together with previous data, the results indicate a major involvement of CYP1A2 in the high affinity component of all three human hepatic CA N-demethylations.
In contrast, CYP2E1 appears to be the main enzyme involved in the low affinity components of CA N1- and N7-demethylation while CA 8-hydroxylation is catalysed predominantly by a CYP3A isoform(s).
Consistent with these observations, cDNA-expressed human CYP1A2catalyzed the N1-, N3- and N7-demethylation of CA and apparent Km values were similar (0.24-0.28 mM) for all three reactions and comparable to those observed previously with human liver microsomes.
Diethyldithiocarbamate, a selective inhibitor of CYP2E1, inhibited the low affinity CA N1- and N7-demethylation, with IC50 values of 23 microM and 11 microM, respectively.
significant correlations (r = 0.87-0.97, P < 0.001) were observed between CA 8-hydroxylation and immunoreactive CYP3A content and the CYP3A-mediated reactions benzo(a)pyrene hydroxylation, omeprazole sulfoxidation and aflatoxin B1 mutagenesis.
Involvement of human liver cytochrome P450 3A in vinblastine metabolism: drug interactions.
Vinblastine biotransformation was investigated by using a human liver microsomes library.
The drug was converted into one major metabolite (M) upon incubation with the microsomes.
A large interindividual variation in vinblastine metabolism was observed among the samples tested, with a 4.4 ratio between the lowest and the highest metabolic rates.
The biotransformation of vinblastine followed Michaelis-Menten kinetics (Km = 6.82 +/- 0.27 microM and Vmax = 0.64 +/- 0.06 nmol/min/mg protein).
These metabolic drug interactions may alter the antitumor activity and/or toxicity of the drug during anticancer chemotherapy.
The involvement of the cytochrome P450 3A subfamily in vinblastine metabolism was demonstrated by the following body of evidence: (a) the competitive inhibition of vinblastine biotransformation by cytochrome P450 3A specific probes with Ki values of 0.17, 22.5, 14.8, and 35.3 microM for ketoconazole, erythromycin, troleandomycin, and vindesine, respectively; (b) the immuno inhibition of vinblastine metabolism by polyclonal anti-cytochrome P450 3A antibodies; (c) the highly significantcorrelation between the level of cytochrome P450 3A determined by Western blots and vinblastine metabolism (r = 0.759, P < 0.001); (d) the highly significantcorrelation between erythromycin N-demethylase activity (mediated by cytochrome P450 3A) and vinblastine metabolism (r = 0.83, P < 0.001); (e) the significantcorrelation between the CYP3A4 mRNA level and vinblastine metabolism (r = 0.60, P < 0.1).
Although vincristine and navelbine (members of the Vinca alkaloid family) also inhibit the metabolism of vinblastine, suggesting the involvement of the cytochrome subfamily in their respective metabolisms, other anticancer drugs currently associated with vinblastine in chemotherapy (etoposide, Adriamycin, lomustine, and teniposide) also interfere with vinblastine biotransformation.
Specificity of substrate and inhibitor probes for human cytochromes P450 1A1 and 1A2.
Kinetic and inhibitor studies using cDNA-expressed enzymes and human liver microsomes have characterized the specificity of a range of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1Asubstrate and inhibitor probes towards the two isoforms comprising this subfamily.
Expressed CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 both catalyzed the O-deethylation of phenacetin, although the apparent Km was about 4-foldlower for CYP1A2 (25 vs. 108 microM).
Phenacetin O-deethylation exhibited biphasic kinetics in human liver microsomes, and the apparent Km for the high-affinity component (9 +/- 6 microM) was consistent with the involvement of CYP1A2 in this reaction.
Together with previous data, the results indicate that the majority of human CYP1A xenobiotic inhibitor and substrate probes are nonspecific in their recognition of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, although selectivity is apparent for some compounds.
The prototypic CYP1A xenobiotic inhibitor and substrate probes alpha-naphthoflavone, ellipticine, 7-ethoxycoumarin and 7-Ethoxyresorufin all inhibitedCYP1A1- and CYP1A2-mediated phenacetin O-deethylation as well as the high-affinity component of human liver phenacetin O-deethylase activity.
alpha-Naphthoflavone and 7-ethoxycoumarin were, however, approximately 10-fold more potent as inhibitors of CYP1A2 than CYP1A1.
Other putative human CYP1A xenobiotic substrates and inhibitors, including caffeine, 5- and 8-methoxypsoralen, nifedipine, paraxanthine, propranolol and theophylline similarly inhibitedCYP1A1- and 1A2-catalyzedphenacetin O-deethylation and the high-affinity human liver phenacetin O-deethylase.
In contrast, the monoclonal antibody MAb 1-7-1, raised against 3-methylcholanthrene-inducible rat cytochromes 450, almost abolished CYP1A1-mediated phenacetin O-deethylation, but had no effect on human liver microsomal- or CYP1A2-catalyzedphenacetin dealkylation.
The role of cytochrome P4502D6 in the metabolism of paroxetine by human liver microsomes.
Paroxetine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor possessing anti-depressant activity.
Demethylenation of the methylenedioxy phenyl group is the initial step in its metabolism, the liberated carbon appearing in vitro as formate.
A radioassay involving [14C-methylenedioxy] paroxetine was developed and used to examine the role of cytochrome P4502D6 in paroxetinemetabolism by human liver microsomes.
The rate of formate production was much higher in microsomes from an extensive metaboliser of debrisoquine than from a poor metaboliser.
These observations strongly suggested that the process was catalysed by the enzyme cytochrome P4502D6.
The ability of microsomes from a poor metaboliser of debrisoquine to demethylenate paroxetine provided further evidence for the involvement of an enzyme distinct from P4502D6.
This was confirmed by kinetic analysis of the process in microsomes from both poor and extensive metabolisers.
It is concluded that, in man, the initial step of paroxetinemetabolism is performed by at least two enzymes, one of which is cytochrome P4502D6.
Also, demethylenation of paroxetine was inhibited by the quinidine and quinine isomer pair in microsomes from the extensive metaboliser only.
Metabolism could not be completely inhibited by quinidine, the residual activity representing the contribution of at least one other enzyme.
Inhibition of debrisoquinclearance in perfused rat livers and inhibition of dextromethorphanmetabolism in human liver microsomes by 4-hydroxydebrisoquin or other metabolites of debrisoquin.
Debrisoquin undergoes oxidative metabolism to 4-hydroxydebrisoquin, catalyzed by cytochrome CYP2D1 in rats and CYP2D6 in humans.
Cytochrome CYP2D6 also plays a major role in dextromethorphan O-demethylation.
In preliminary studies in perfused Lewis rat livers, we observed a difference in repeat clearance experiments using debrisoquin, but not dextromethorphan.
To determine whether this change in clearance with time was due to the accumulation of 4-hydroxydebrisoquin, we sequentially used a recirculating and nonrecirculating perfusion system in the same liver perfusion experiment.
We also studied the kinetics of dextromethorphan O-demethylation in microsomes prepared from human and rat livers in the presence and absence of 4-hydroxydebrisoquin.
Results from the perfused rat liver experiments showed a drop in clearance from 3.27 +/- 0.57 ml/min (clearance 1) to 1.61 +/- 0.27 ml/min (clearance 2) (p less than 0.05 vs. clearance 1) during recirculation, but clearancereturned to 3.21 +/- 0.46 ml/min (clearance 3, no significance vs. clearance 1) after a 30-min period of liver perfusion using a nonrecirculating system.
There was significant accumulation of 4-hydroxydebrisoquin in the liver perfusate during recirculation, and concentrations fell when the nonrecirculating system was used.
In microsomal studies, 4-hydroxydebrisoquin competitively inhibiteddextromethorphanmetabolism in human microsomes was 600 microM.
These data suggest that: (a) 4-hydroxydebrisoquin and/or other metabolites of debrisoquin have an inhibitory effect on CYP2D1 and CYP2D6; (b) the active site of human CYP2D6 has different substrate specificity than the rat isozyme (CYP2D1) and/or that the pathways of metabolism of dextromethorphan are different in the Lewis rat and not primarily dependent on the activity of CYP2D1.)
